College Sophomore Glossary, with Postscripts for my Past and Present Self
Appreciation Doctor - My grandmother, Mimi, is a manager of her local branch of SendOutCards, an online greeting card company that pays local marketers to grow the company. 
She watches webinars to improve her self-marketing skills and to encourage herself. 
One of the ways that she built her brand is by naming herself the “Appreciation Doctor.” 
She invites me to lunch under the premise of how long it’s been since the last one, but I deflect invitations to pay to join her business. 
& mimi’s getting older, & wasn’t a manager for her local branch—she was the only one. she’s the only one in a team of one, & she was trying to relate.
my sister and i know it’s a multi-level marketing business.
& it wasn’t like Papa is lavishing her with spending money, after the company went under.
& she still sends greeting cards, with pre-packaged brownies inside.
Backbone - If you Google-search “how do you know if you’re successful,” Forbes suggests that you take charge and speak up; lead, don’t follow.
& the point is that you don’t chase successfulness—you live as if you already are & mimi always did.
it’s a southern thing, to live with airs high above your means.
& you can’t fall from a reputation if you act like you never did, & then when it’s too obvious like it was all part of the plan, as if what is wrong is but a minor distraction from the life you deserve.
College - I didn’t practice for my interviews.
When I went to an interview day at a Presbyterian college in Georgia my senior year of high school, I was asked to sit at a square table with seven other applicants and list various tactical items (flint, tarp, fishing line, from “least important” to “most important” if we were trying to survive in the wild.
“I’m an Eagle Scout,” I told them.
“I got this.” The assignment was to survive in the Arctic; I had just flown in from Central America.
We did not do well.
& I don’t know who I would’ve become if I had gone to covenant.
maybe I’d be more christian.
maybe I’d have dropped out.
& maybe I’d have strived for perfection like I’ve always done, trying to justify that I deserved to belong in this world & failing like I failed to justify that I belonged at that school.
& maybe I’d have found friends & self-actualized & gotten a great internship & become a teacher.
& the illusion of choice falls away to reveal that I’ve only ever done exactly what I’ve been meant to all along.
Data - The United States unemployment rate was 4.1 percent in December.
For the average-age of college graduates, for the demographic of young adults aged 20-24 years old, that figure was raised to 7.1 percent.
For someone my age, someone 18-19 years old, that figure was 13.2 percent.
& the unemployment rate is lower now, after being 15 percent two years ago & it’s still about the same for people my age, higher in fact, at 7.8 percent.
& people aged 18-19 are employed much more than they were back then, a decrease of 5 percentage points.
Extraversion - I take a lot of personality tests.
I am an INTJ, according to the Myers-Briggs test, a high S-C on the DISC test, and on the Big Five test I took last night, I scored low on “extraversion” and “conscientiousness,” but high on “agreeableness” and “openness to experience.” I scored just below the middle regarding “neuroticism.” & I am not an INTJ.
I’m an ENFP, & for the sake of transparency, I think I knew that.
& the DISC test doesn’t matter much except that it’s reiterated in metaphorical matrices, like the one with the golden retriever & the lion & the beaver & the otter, & the one where you’re melancholy & sanguine & choleric & phlegmatic as if it’s the 1500s.
& the Big Five test tracks, & a few months later I became obsessed with the Enneagram & locked in on what I was trying to say all along, which is that at my core I want to be good, and for people to know that I’m good, and to never get anything wrong because then I might not belong here.
Florida Southern College - So far, I would say I’ve enjoyed my college experience.
One of those things that the professors always skip over on syllabus day is the list of requirements that the class fulfills according to the Course Catalog.
I didn’t know how important SLOs and Effective Communication goals were until I tried to map out all of the classes I still needed to take.
I got confused, and then I got anxious.
After that fiasco, I went to my advisor and he helped me feel a lot better about it.
I’m pretty sure I’ll graduate on time.
& I did graduate on time, & with three majors, & with crippling anxiety.
& I did the same thing in grad school.
& I’m gonna graduate on time again.
Grandma - Every day, she gets up, reads the Wall Street Journal, and balances her checkbooks while she eats her breakfast.
Then she watches the morning news while she either knits or works on a puzzle (crossword or jigsaw).
She owns two radios, both of which are set to the same channel so that when she walks from her living room to her office and sewing room she doesn’t miss a word.
Once, I switched the office radio to NPR, but she didn’t know how to change it back so she didn’t bother to try.
Grandma plays single-suit solitaire, scans her Facebook feed, challenges the computer in Scrabble, and takes naps.
Her car is a 2005 Toyota Camry, but it only has 50,000 miles on it since the only places she drives to (for the most part) are the grocery store, the gas station, the Baptist church where she volunteers at a basketball camp, the bank, and sometimes Olive Garden.
Grandma also visits her friend Ruthie at a nursing home that is closing this summer, and plays dominos with her even though Ms.
Padfield is often unclean and incoherent.
Grandma has watched her friends and children die.
& Ruth died a year ago.
& so have many others.
& grandma turns ninety this year if she can kick her bacterial colitis, & I turn twenty-five, & this means she was 65 when I was born, & we’re both leos, and the radios are still on in her house, & she still volunteers at church.
& she still walks her neighborhood every day, & I don’t know what I’ll do with myself when she dies.
& when I say ‘I love you,’ she says ‘bye-bye, dear.’
Honesty Hour
How do I present myself? How do I really sound? How do I really look? How do I put my parents fears to rest? Is it wrong to pity my parents? How do I work through uncomfortable situations, like when my two roommates might run for the same student government position and I don’t want to have to choose between them? & I should’ve known I was an enneagram 1.
& that’s because no other type is so obsessed with these questions except the 4, & they’re only obsessed with presentation because they’re obsessed with being authentic & special.
& my roommates, both 3s, both obsessed with success for the sake of earning their spot on the leaderboard of life, did apply for the same SGA position, & they had a falling out, & don’t speak, & both took longer than me to figure out they were queer.
& one is messy in public, & one is messy in private.
& SGA didn’t matter, except when it did, but even then not that much.
Interviews - When I came to FSC on my own, a month after the interviews in Georgia, Mimi dropped me off.
I helped her take her first selfie in the parking lot, and now whenever I get a SendOutCard from her that picture of us is on it.
I walked into the interview and talked with two adults I had never met, with no introductions from either than them but “hi” and “welcome” and “good to meet you” and “let’s get started.” I used to think it was weird to have answers prepared ahead of time, but I recognize the value in it.
I forgot to mention I was an Eagle Scout until after I had walked out the door.
& I’ve interviewed plenty since then, & it’s about the same each time.
“Just Browsing” - A very empowering experience is walking through a department store or open house as if you could actually afford an object such as a $400 three-piece corduroy suit or a two-story three-bedroom three-bathroom bungalow in the heart of a historic district that’s pre-furnished with Mid-Century Modern inspiration.
K.
- The way someone might respond to the ultimate passive-aggressive text message, “K.,” says more about them than any online quiz or professionally-vouched-for test.
Besides, anyone can claim anything about themselves on an online quiz, but with a message, you have the receipts.
If I ever become a hiring manager, I want to conduct interviews over text.
Learning - The editors of the Southern hold their writers accountable to standards.
Regarding many young, hopeful journalists and writers, criticism an editor gives can be either the most damaging or the most helpful experience for them (the editor).
Marketing - Becoming an Eagle Scout was one of the most fun and formative experiences of my life.
Once I reached my senior year of high school, however, what had at one time been a father-son bonding experience and a regular opportunity to engage in nature had been turned into another piece of my resumé.
I was routinely told that the Eagle Scout rank was great for getting jobs and for holding up to people as proof that I was worth hiring.
I haven’t pulled my sash out except to loan to someone as part of an Up-themed costume.
Niceties - I bet President Dr.
Anne B.
Kerr gets tired of walking donors under esplanades to the tune of cold, hard cash.
Only 5 - I applied to 5 colleges.
Two were my parents’ alma maters; one school had a linguistics program; one had students from almost every Latin American nation, and one has pretty architecture and an English program that challenges me beyond what I knew to be possible.
Papa - My grandfather, husband (in law only) to Mimi, works six days a week and drives an hour each way.
He brokers citrus, just as his parents did before him.
He is proud of his name, even though it used to own slaves.
He is a man in the old sense—he will work until he dies and he will never talk about his feelings or his marriage or his money to anyone.
My dad got in trouble for arguing about religion with him, even though he has a Master’s degree in Biblical studies and Papa doesn’t.
Quiet - Sensory deprivation: a process by which someone is deprived of normal external stimuli such as sight and sound for an extended period of time.
Sensory deprivation: the opposite of Tutu’s Cybercafé
Right and wrong? - I had a choice: I could apply for an award that would let me travel to Asia, or I could spend the semester staying stateside while my sister began college.
I could learn a third language or continue to burrow into the fertile soil of the one I’ve spoken since age two.
I could elect to do what I know people want for me, or to listen to my own judgment and not let the months of August through December happen for me anywhere but here.
Sister, Snapchat - “You seem to treat everything like it’s your high school debate conference and the best delegate prize.” “You make everything into something that you need to prove.” “You seem to need to prove that you’re good enough or that you’re smart or something.” “Part of what college has done is made you feel like you need to have a speech prepared for every little belief.
Or that you need to have so many beliefs and opinions.” “Can you sign into my account on Ulta and order what’s in the cart.”
Type A - My first semester, I lived with a young man who is very outgoing, driven, knowing of what he wants and savvy of what positions he will need to take to get there.
At first, living with him made me more competitive, but today competition isn’t being more involved, but more me.
Undertaking - I will never be as content as Grandma.
I will never be as business-oriented as Mimi.
I will never be as routine as Papa.
I can never be any of those.
I will be content, focused, and dedicated.
Value - A very empowering experience is walking through a department store or open house knowing you have no need to afford an object such as a $400 three-piece corduroy suit or a two-story three-bedroom three-bathroom bungalow in the heart of a historic district that’s pre-furnished with Mid-Century Modern inspiration.
Winning - The Accelerated Reader program rewards students for reading books and gives them points for comprehension, which can be spent on teacher-designated prizes.
Each child, despite special needs or low language proficiency, may choose to read from any level: easy books, chapter books, or the nonfiction.
They know which readings are worth more points, but the point is that they are reading.
Students are not allowed to shame others reading lower-level books but are encouraged to get outside of their literary comfort zones.
‘X’ on a list - Florida Southern College offers a 4-year graduation guarantee.
My life expectancy, calculated by the Social Security Administration, is around 82 years.
College will likely make up 5 percent of my total lifespan.
Youth Labor - On campus, I am paid for three positions.
I work at the McKay Archives Center, the admissions office as a Southern Ambassador, and as an editor of the Southern.
If I didn’t have financial aid, I would still be screwed.
Zoo - One morning, I was walking from the Fannin Center to Nicholas Hall.
As I walked past Edge Hall, I witnessed a campus cat, an opossum, and a raccoon all sharing some of the kibbles that the Cat Club puts out for Spottacus and the other felines
I like that I believe everything can be a form.
I like that in my writing I care about what's true, but I'm also discovering that I love persona.
I like remembering things, especially things that surprised me to remember, and I love this stillness of writing
I like when I spend 6 hours on a poem.
I like hyper fixating on a piece and getting it just right formally, whether it needs to look like a Twitter thread or a Rotunda.
I really love when the words come too fast for me to write them down quickly enough.
I love following the rules I invented for myself to follow, and trying other people's rules on for size
I worry about the audience I don't know I have.
I'm afraid of not being right the first time.
How does that lack of confidence reflect some way you identify or characterize yourself?
I used to feel like God or my parents were reading over my shoulder as I wrote, and now, I experienced that fear in a new way -- I think I hover over myself instead of being truly present to the piece and externalizing it as words on a paper that only I can see and access.
Right now, I am dictating my thoughts to Microsoft Word, instead of writing them down.
(by hand).
It feels a little bit like a captain's log, but it also feels authentic? I haven't yet said words that I didn't believe, and I don't feel that I can take them back as easily, because I just said them.
It's almost like setting them in stone, instead of writing them in pencil.
It makes those words feel heavier.
I believe my writing to be authentic, but I don't believe it to be complete, most of the pieces.
I want to use better words and think more deeply, but not at the expense of accessibility.
I wrote a poem recently where I talked about spending my metaphors on people, and I think I speak poetically to people instead of writing down things that could become great poems.
Or at least I don't keep track of the things that I do say.
In that vein, I would like to keep better notes.
I want to keep a commonplace book with me that I actually trust to hold thoughts and connections that I make and things that I speak to people that actually seem powerful to them or wise to them.
I would like to master more traditional forms, so that I could play with them.
I wish I didn't judge myself so harshly or try to anticipate reader response.
I am a visual writer, and a writer that thinks a lot about the ethics of what I'm writing about and how I'm writing about it.
As someone who identifies as a poet of witness, this is especially important.
In undergrad, I talked about being a hybrid poet interested in hybrid forms and meanings.
I also define myself as a Christian, who writes poetry, But I feel that this is a impetus for my work rather than a boundary.
I don't want to cringe at the word.
And I don't want to feel shame that I haven't written in a certain amount of time, and I want being a “writer” to mean more than just poems or academic pieces.
I want writing to be at the center of my life.
I see that I have to have reading at the center of my life for that to be possible.
I have to give myself time to write and to read, and I think my lack of discipline is my biggest obstacle to being a great writer at this time.
I can clear boundaries with myself and others, but I also need to give myself a lot more grace.
Routine will be a huge help here.
I think also having accountability, a group, and friends who also want me to write as much as I want me to write it is hugely important.
I really thrive in a community, especially an intergenerational 1, where I can balance ideas and deliberate and generate new thoughts and ideas and possibilities.
I wonder if there's some affirmations then I can repeat to myself, and I bet that getting a better sense of the kind of tradition that I'm a part of as a writer it's gonna be really important.
This goes back to identifying as a reader, and as a scholar, and as someone who's informed in their field.
I used to feel comfortable being informed and being identified as a journalist because I was reading journalism all the time, and I think to be a great writer and someone who can teach writing, I must position myself as someone informed as a reader of poetry and of poetry of witness and of Latin American poetry and of religious and spiritual poetry as well.
I want as much as possible.
But I hate the thought of it being or happening outside the scope of an in-person interaction.
I don't want to read the comments, but I do want comments from my peers and my professors, and I really value the conferences and the workshops and the feedback that I get from writers I trust and the responses that I get from audiences I care about.
I think I could keep better notes of my criticism, and I think that I should be more proactive about seeking out and holding onto the accountability that being in this program offers right now, but I also want to find "my people” who I could count on to read my work in the future.
I absolutely see a roadblock in front of me in terms of writing about international life and growing up abroad, especially because my upbringing was that of evangelism into the Christian faith.
I hold myself back from writing about that because I'm afraid of blowback and judgment, even though I was a kid at the time, even though my parents are grown adults who can handle themselves, and even though I had no control over my childhood and how it turned out and where I lived.
All I can say is what I know to be true, and I often say that I don't want anything less than that, but I don't act that way.
I think that is where form can really be helpful, and where craft is necessary, because if a reader isn't compelled, I think they'll look for any way they can to take it apart.
I want to generate a lot of work period I want to develop discipline and fearlessness towards my writing practice and the subject of my writing.
I went to put out some really cool forms and essays, and I want to learn from my peers.
I want to grow in my understanding of digital media so that I could carry a digital exhibit or a digital chapbook, which involves me learning coding.
I also want to become much better at traditional forms and learn more deeply about poetry in English, because while I learned so much about poets and specific works in high school, and learned a lot about Spanish grammar and Spanish poetry very deeply, I didn't really learn the mechanics of poetry super well, or why certain kinds of poetry are so well received in academic journals and prominent journals.
I want to learn more about the industry, not so that I can ingratiate myself with Adroit or something, but just so that I can understand why what’s popular is popular.
I want my life's work to be a collection of books and essays that really speak to the present, and speak to helping people work through life and suffering.
While I can be critical, I see myself more as a normative scholar, pointing up at what should it be, rather than pointing out all the ways that the world isn't like that.
I want more people to write poetry, and I would love to be a teacher or community leader who also has books.
I want to live somewhere that makes me want to write, like my hometown or in Central America.
I want to write about family, missionary life, American Christianity, queer Christianity, the environment, and media, hopefully only in forms that are interesting and eye-catching to read.
I think I could really make a name for myself as someone who's doing work that isn't just thoughtful and deep, but is fun? Something that is engaging to read or interactive, instead of just words on a piece of paper.
For so long in journalism I've been thinking about how to get people to move past the headline, to move past the title.
I think that's one of the hardest things to get people to do right now because it's one of the hardest things for me, to get past the title or the introduction or the cover page.
I want people to be invested in what I have to say, to think I'm wise, but really a lot of that comes down to the discipline that I would like.
I want to give people nuance, and I want to be the kind of commentator that always introduces nuance.
Appreciation Doctor
My grandmother, Mimi, is a manager of her local branch of SendOutCards, an online greeting card company that pays local marketers to grow the company.
She watches webinars to improve her self-marketing skills and to encourage herself.
One of the ways that she built her brand is by naming herself the “Appreciation Doctor.” She invites me to lunch under the premise of the length of time it’s been since the last one, but I have to deflect invitations to spend money to join her program.
& mimi’s getting older, & wasn’t a manager for her local branch—she was the only one.
she’s the only one in a team of one, & she was trying to relate.
& it wasn’t like Papa was going to give her much money to spend on herself.
& she still sends cards.
Backbone
If you Google-search “how do you know if you’re successful,” Forbes is the first result.
One of the ways, the world-recognized business magazine notes, to be sure you’re successful is that you take charge and speak up; lead, don’t follow.
& the point is that you don’t chase successfulness—you live as if you already are & mimi always did.
it’s a southern thing, to live with airs high above your means.
you can’t fall from a reputation if you act like it was all part of the plan, as if what is wrong is but a minor distraction from the life you deserve.
College
I never practiced for any interviews.
When I attended attended an interview day at a college in Georgia during January of my senior year of high school, I met with a scholarship board that I do not remember and answered questions I do not remember.
What I know is that at one point I was asked to sit at a square table with seven other applicants and list items from “least important” to “most important” if we were trying to survive in the arctic.
“I’m an Eagle Scout,” I told them.
“I got this.”
Never mind that I was an Eagle Scout from a tropical country.
We did not do well.
& I don’t know who I would’ve become if I had gone to covenant.
maybe I’d be more christian.
maybe I’d have dropped out.
& maybe I’d have strived for perfection like I’ve always done, trying to justify that I deserved to belong in this world & failing like I failed to justify that I belonged at that school.
& maybe I’d have found friends & self-actualized & gotten a great internship & become a teacher.
& the illusion of choice falls away to reveal that I’ve only ever done exactly what I’ve been meant to all along.
Data
The United States unemployment rate was 4.1 percent in December.
For the average-age of college graduates, for the demographic of young adults aged 20-24 years old, that figure was raised to 7.1 percent.
For someone my age, someone 18-19 years old, that figure was 13.2 percent.
& the unemployment rate is lower now, after being 15 percent two years ago & it’s still about the same for people my age, higher in fact, at 7.8 percent.
& people aged 18-19 are employed much more than they were back then, a decrease of 5 percentage points.
Extraversion
I take a lot of personality tests.
I am an INTJ, according to the Myers-Briggs test, a high S-C on the DISC test, and on the Big Five test I took last night, I scored low on “extraversion” and “conscientiousness,” but high on “agreeableness” and “openness to experience.” I scored just below the middle regarding “neuroticism.”
& I am not an INTJ.
I’m an ENFP, & for the sake of transparency, I think I knew that.
& the DISC test doesn’t matter much except that it’s reiterated in metaphorical matrices, like the one with the golden retriever & the lion & the beaver & the otter, & the one where you’re melancholy & sanguine & choleric & phlegmatic as if it’s the 1500s.
& the Big Five test tracks, & a few months later I became obsessed with the Enneagram & locked in on what I was trying to say all along, which is that at my core I want to be good, and for people to know that I’m good, and to never get anything wrong because then I might not belong here.
FSC
So far, I would say I’ve enjoyed my college experience.
One of those things that the professors always skip over on syllabus day is the list of requirements that the class fulfills according to the Course Catalog.
I didn’t know how important SLOs and Effective Communication goals were until I tried to map out all of the classes I still needed to take.
I got confused, and then I got anxious.
After that fiasco, I went to my advisor and he helped me feel a lot better about it.
I’m pretty sure I’ll graduate on time.
& I did graduate on time, & with three majors, & with crippling anxiety.
& I did the same thing in grad school.
& I’m gonna graduate on time again.
Grandparent
Every day, Grandma gets up, reads the Wall Street Journal, and balances her checkbooks while she eats her breakfast.
Then she watches the morning news while she either knits or works on a puzzle (crossword or jigsaw).
She owns two radios, both of which are set to the same channel so that when she walks from her living room to her office and sewing room she doesn’t miss a word.
Once, I switched the office radio to NPR, but she didn’t know how to change it back so she didn’t bother to try.
Grandma plays single-suit solitaire, scans her Facebook feed, challenges the computer in Scrabble, and takes naps.
Her car is a 2005 Toyota Camry, but it only has 50,000 miles on it since the only places she drives to (for the most part) are the grocery store, the gas station, the Baptist church where she volunteers at a basketball camp, the bank, and sometimes Olive Garden.
Grandma also visits her friend Ruthie at a nursing home that is closing this summer, and plays dominos with her even though Ms.
Padfield is often unclean and incoherent.
Grandma has watched her friends and children die.
& Ruth died a year ago.
& so have many others.
& grandma turns ninety this year if she can kick her bacterial colitis, & I turn twenty-five, & this means she was 65 when I was born, & we’re both leos, and the radios are still on in her house, & she still volunteers at church.
& she still walks her neighborhood every day, & I don’t know what I’ll do with myself when she dies.
& when I say ‘I love you,’ she says ‘bye-bye, dear.’
Honesty Hour
How do I present myself?
How do I really sound?
How do I really look?
How do I put my parents fears to rest?
Is it wrong to pity my parents?
How do I work through uncomfortable situations, like when my two roommates might run for the same student government position and I don’t want to have to choose between them?
& I should’ve known I was an enneagram 1.
& that’s because no other type is so obsessed with these questions except the 4, & they’re only obsessed with presentation because they’re obsessed with being authentic & special.
& my roommates, both 3s, both obsessed with success for the sake of earning their spot on the leaderboard of life, did apply for the same SGA position, & they had a falling out, & don’t speak, & both took longer than me to figure out they were queer.
& one is messy in public, & one is messy in private.
& SGA didn’t matter, except when it did, but even then not that much.
Interviews
When I came to FSC on my own, a month after the interviews in Georgia, Mimi dropped me off.
I helped her take her first selfie in the parking lot, and now whenever I get a SendOutCard from her that picture of us is on it.
I walked into the interview and talked with two adults I had never met, with no introductions from either than them but “hi” and “welcome” and “good to meet you” and “let’s get started.”
I used to think it was weird to have answers prepared ahead of time, but I recognize the value in it.
I forgot to mention I was an Eagle Scout until after I had walked out the door.
& I’ve interviewed plenty since then, & it’s about the same each time.
“Just Browsing”
A very empowering experience is walking through a department store or open house as if you could actually afford an object such as a $400 three-piece corduroy suit or a two-story three-bedroom three-bathroom bungalow in the heart of a historic district that’s pre-furnished with Mid-Century Modern inspiration.
K.
The way someone might respond to the ultimate passive-aggressive text message, “K.,” says more about them than any online quiz or professionally-vouched-for test.
Besides, anyone can claim anything about themselves on an online quiz, but with a message, you have the receipts.
If I ever become a hiring manager, I want to conduct interviews over text.
Learning
The editors of the Southern hold their writers accountable to standards.
Regarding many young, hopeful journalists and writers, criticism an editor gives can be either the most damaging or the most helpful experience for them (the editor).
Marketing
Becoming an Eagle Scout was one of the most fun and formative experiences of my life.
Once I reached my senior year of high school, however, what had at one time been a father-son bonding experience and a regular opportunity to engage in nature had been turned into another piece of my resumé.
I was routinely told that the Eagle Scout rank was great for getting jobs and for holding up to people as proof that I was worth hiring.
I haven’t pulled my sash out except to loan to someone as part of an Up-themed costume.
Niceties
I bet President Dr. Anne B. Kerr gets tired of walking donors under esplanades to the tune of cold, hard cash.
Only 5
I applied to 5 colleges.
Two were my parents’ alma maters; one school had a linguistics program; one had students from almost every Latin American nation, and one has pretty architecture and an English program that challenges me beyond what I knew to be possible.
Papa
My grandfather, husband (in law only) to Mimi, works six days a week and drives an hour each way.
He brokers citrus, just as his parents did before him.
He is proud of his name, even though it used to own slaves.
He is a man in the old sense—he will work until he dies and he will never talk about his feelings or his marriage or his money to anyone. My dad got in trouble for arguing about religion with him, even though he has a Master’s degree in Biblical studies and Papa doesn’t.
Quiet
Sensory deprivation: a process by which someone is deprived of normal external stimuli such as sight and sound for an extended period of time
Sensory deprivation: the opposite of Tutu’s Cybercafé
Right and wrong?
I had a choice: I could apply for an award that would let me travel to Asia, or I could spend the semester staying stateside while my sister began college.
I could learn a third language or continue to burrow into the fertile soil of the one I’ve spoken since age two.
I could elect to do what I know people want for me, or to listen to my own judgment and not let the months of August through December happen for me anywhere but here.
Sister, Snapchat
“You seem to treat everything like it’s your high school debate conference and the best delegate prize”
“You make everything into something that you need to prove”
“You seem to need to prove that you’re good enough or that you’re smart or something”
“Part of what college has done is made you feel like you need to have a speech prepared for every little belief.
Or that you need to have so many beliefs and opinions.”
“Can you sign into my account on Ulta and order what’s in the cart.”
Type A
My first semester, I lived with a young man who is very outgoing, driven, knowing of what he wants and savvy of what positions he will need to take to get there.
At first, living with him made me more competitive, but today competition isn’t being more involved, but more me.
Undertaking
I will never be as content as Grandma.
I will never be as business-oriented as Mimi.
I will never be as routine as Papa.
I can never be any of those.
I will be content, focused, and dedicated.
Value
A very empowering experience is walking through a department store or open house knowing you have no need to afford an object such as a $400 three-piece corduroy suit or a two-story three-bedroom three-bathroom bungalow in the heart of a historic district that’s pre-furnished with Mid-Century Modern inspiration.
Winning
The Accelerated Reader program rewards students for reading books and gives them points for comprehension, which can be spent on teacher-designated prizes.
Each child, despite special needs or low language proficiency, may choose to read from any level: easy books, chapter books, or the nonfiction.
They know which readings are worth more points, but the point is that they are reading.
Students are not allowed to shame others reading lower-level books but are encouraged to get outside of their literary comfort zones.
‘X’ on a list
Florida Southern College offers a 4-year graduation guarantee.
My life expectancy, calculated by the Social Security Administration, is around 82 years.
College will likely make up 5 percent of my total lifespan.
Youth Labor
On campus, I am paid for three positions.
I work at the McKay Archives Center, the admissions office as a Southern Ambassador, and as an editor of the Southern.
If I didn’t have financial aid, I would still be screwed.
Zoo
One morning, I was walking from the Fannin Center to Nicholas Hall.
As I walked past Edge Hall, I witnessed a campus cat, an opossum, and a raccoon all sharing some of the kibbles that the Cat Club puts out for Spottacus and the other felines.
Changing lives, one heart at a time
“Do you think it’s possible to change someone’s beliefs about something? Frankly, I think it’s impossible,” my manager tells me.
She’s just had a chat with Mark, the man-Catholic on staff at the coffee shop we all barista at.
She’s 21, a pastor’s kid, and has left God behind since the church hurt her and her friends.
She had a therapist, and doesn’t now.
I don’t blame her for asking questions, as she has many times.
She often asks me why I would chose to identify with a religion that’s done so much harm, which she asks with the same righteousness as the question she’s asking now, as though it’s meant to persuade me to stop, that I’m wrong.
Bible Camp.
It’s a simple premise: summer camp, but Christian.
For the first two decades of my life, it was easy to see the one I went to, Camp Gilead, as nothing but that.
A camp that used to be a golf course on a lake that used to be higher (that spent an hour in the early morning, and hour midmorning, an hour and a half in the evening, and an hour in the night doing something Biblical).
“How to have summer camp in a God-honoring way.” The longer you’re in a community of people that identify as Christians, though, the harder it is to keep the field of view, the camera lens, zoomed in to say “just camp with Bible stuff.”
Because as much as Christians like to say we all believe the same things, we all believe in Jesus, there are people who will grip the edges of the frame and zoom things into the micro-level, to show you just how different people are, to remind you not all Christians are created equal, not born again the same—in fact, they suggest, they might not be born again at all.
Because as much as Christians like to say we all believe the same things, we all believe in Jesus, there’s God gripping the edges of the frame and zooming things out to the macro-level, to show you just how unusual and irregular this institution is from anywhere else.
Figure 2: International Christianity.
As with every essay, I have to start with “When we moved to Nicaragua.” When we moved to Nicaragua, I started going to a different kind of church than the choired, carpeted, padded pewed, sanctuaried church of my childhood, the one that gave you a King James Version of the Bible when you graduated from kindergarten Sunday School.
It was that way with almost all of the churches that we visited while my parents were fundraising, little Baptist churches in different suburbs in Florida, Georgia, Ohio.
Church basements with an indoor dodgeball tape marked out in quarters of red, blue, yellow, and green.
A parking lot with the same in paint.
Rooms with one big table, several kid-sized plastic chairs, idealized images of Noah’s ark floating on the waves (giraffes and elephants’ heads sticking out the top), and maps of Ancient Israel and the Mediterranean, maps of the first missionary journeys.
The bathrooms all smelled the same, with that pink hand soap they all had, sometimes with mints.
I lost my first front tooth in a church basement during a showing of VeggieTales.
The best part about corporate Christianity was Vacation Bible School, which had been turned into a marketable program for purchase through online retail distributors like Concordia Supply.
In the early aughts, puppets were still a major medium for VBS—prerecorded CDs with lessons performed by the youth group leaders.
When we decided puppets were cheesy, digital content replaced it, underwritten by Christian publishing industries like LifeWay and Answers—the former, a major evangelical publisher in Nashville, the latter the Creationist publisher behind the Creation Museum and the Ark Encounter.
In Florida, the nearest Christian experience was the Holy Land Experience, a theme park with replicas of Solomon’s Temple, the Garden of Gethesemane, and the tomb of Jesus.
The first church we went to in Nicaragua was a house church in Nagarote, past Mateare, between Managua and Leon.
We drove an hour each way to arrive there.
Our first time, the pastor asked if my mother would be interested in leading Sunday School for the children.
In a miscommunication between To their chagrin, this turned into a weekly position.
As I sit in the coffee shop I work at, not on shift, I hear a woman make “if you think about it,” statements that do not connect to one another rhetorically or persuasively.
“I can’t help but think about…” and “you’re cherry picking,” and “why this but why not that.” I’m incensed, and I turn back to my computer where my enneagram newsletter reminds me that “When you relate to others from your Social Role as ‘the Teacher’ or ‘the Educator,’ you believe you must instill wisdom in the ignorant, uplift the fallen, and show others how to do something useful and productive with their lives.” Having been on the verge of doing exactly that, I do not appreciate being called out.
“Can you relate to others more authentically in the moment?” the newsletter asks.
I want to authentically tell this woman that she’s doing exactly what she’s mad at Christians for—cherry-picking Old and New Testament verses out of context to make a point about an experience she has no concept of, generalizing about the Christian disdain for homosexuals without realizing there are famously many denominations of Christianity that affirm and ordain queer Christians, that people have been queering Christian practice from the beginning, that the American Christian obsession with gay sex is less than a century old, and that if Jesus really was “tempted in every way, yet without sin,” then he was at least bisexual.
But instead of telling her, I’m telling you, because I need an outlet.
I’m still a member at my Baptist church, what we call our “home church,” in Lakeland.
The pastor is an intellectual and a wide-reader from Boston, a Vietnam veteran, a Red Sox fanatic and dad of a Princeton PhD student who plans IronMan races in Chicago.
He knows about graduate school and guest lectures at local Christian colleges.
The congregation is broadly moderate-to-conservative, though, a mix of construction business owners and young families.
There are lawyers, day-laborers, school teachers, accountants, and domestic workers, nurses, baristas and coffee roasters, cattle drivers and widows.
My grandmother was a founding member.
Being a member of this church, right now, means donating $25 a month and showing up when I’m in town for the holidays.
I used to be part of a college group with a bunch of blue-collar young adults and a few classmates, friends I had been in Kindergarten Sunday School with—Kara, the composer; Olivia, the local art dealer; Annie and Kaia, the nurse.
When I took the membership class, we learned about the history and finances of the church building, but not the Church as a whole.
We read through the statement of faith, which is not affirming of nontraditional marriage.
I carry this contradiction with me everywhere.
In Tuscaloosa, I attend an Episcopal Chapel, where I assume almost everyone leans moderate-to-progressive left.
Because it’s on the very border of the University, it’s made up of undergraduates, Arts & Sciences and Communications professors, retirees, and social workers.
It foregrounds inclusion, and a pride flag embedded in the Episcopal crest hangs above the office door.
For a while, I went to a Bible Study made up of mostly newer Christians who have premarital and queer sex, whose experiences of the Bible each week were sometimes brand new, sometimes more influenced by Jesus-adjacent poets and philosophers than the writings of the church fathers or Christian publishers.
Here, any question is fair game, but answers are few and far between.
This is on purpose: if I’m going to find answers, the work is up to me to do.
I will not be forced.
Last week, I talked to Belle, one of my only friends from Heritage Baptist who emerged the same as me: a questioning, womanist young public theologian with a bachelor’s degree in English, getting a graduate degree, and cringing at the church culture we came out of.
We are both jealous of each other: Belle that I’m in it for writing and media studies, me that she’s in it for a Master’s in divinity.
In another world, Belle and I are colleagues, braving the boundary between the secular and the religious
Beckon, Becklin, Beckon, or Colony & Fifth
My vision for this piece is that each of the paragraphs or pages could be printed on some sort of cardstock, with tabs that you could paste together to create a sculpture of this neighborhood on: starting at the entrance from South Highway, up the hill, past the Nueva Vida orphanage and renutrition center, past the guarded gate and double bars and speed bumps, past the Becklin mansion, and into the big circle on which each of the houses in the narrative sit.
Maybe pages would fold into their own boxes representing an individual house, or story in the narrative, etc.
Kind of like a “Game of Life” board game with the 3D houses and hills that clip into the board.
A question mark with a huge bottom dot.
The head of a leaf-cutter ant with two antennae.
The Hundred Acre Wood, the Backyardigans.
Bark, each unit with its own cell walls, surrounding a center tube, with branches off it.
A blank map of Colonia Becklin could be any one of these things—the proto-Siniatic letter A, the head of an ox.
Regardless of how I might describe the street-shape of the neighborhood, these are the facts:
When I was in fifth or sixth grade, we moved across the street from the white two-story, embassy-recommended compound we had been robbed in to a neighborhood called “Colonia Becklin.” 
“Colony,” like “Quinta,” is a placemarker—like “Barrio,” like “Villas,” like “Urbanization.” 
They’re the “.pdf” or “.docx” of the name of a neighborhood.

So we lived in Becklin.colonia, and my classmate Karly that just got married lived in Malú.quinta, and after becoming empty nesters my parents moved to Vistas_de_Momotombo.urbanización.
We don’t do this a whole lot in English for neighborhoods, but we do it for other edifices: University Mall, Florida Southern College.
It’s the other way around for lakes though—in English, we call things Lake Mirror or Black Warrior River but in Nicaragua, the two huge lakes that sandwich the capital city are just Xolotlán and Cocibolca.
When we moved to Colonia Becklin, it wasn’t a great or hard move.

We’d found our final place to live, meaning we expected to grow up here.

Our old house had a single downstairs office that tripled as a storage space and a guest room, and my parents foresaw a bevy of guests, interns, visitors, and family members staying with us in the course of the next decade, so they wanted to be able to do better than a mattress on the floor between two bookshelves and a fold-out six-foot plastic table with no closet.
Colonia Becklin was the right choice.
I can see you cringing at the name—“Colony”? as in colonialism? 
One way to answer this is that “colony” was meant to mean more like an ant colony, a sequence of living units joined by a corridor, but the longer answer is yes, exactly as in colonialism.
Nicaragua’s almost always had an income inequality problem—it’s second to Haiti in citizen income—and large swaths of land and sectors of business are owned by the same families.
A single family underwrites the national rum company, the Toyota dealership, the burn ward at the private hospital, the business university, and the Barceló Hotel franchise in Managua.
That family is sort of related to another major Nicaraguan family, with original roots in Spain, that begat multiple presidents, several businesses, and an opposition newspaper (and thereby some recent political prisoners).
A third major family, of dictatorship fame, was overthrown and killed in the 1970s.
The Becklins aren’t any of these families, but they were wealthy enough, at some point, to build a whole neighborhood and name it after themselves.
But onto Colonia Becklin’s colonialist historical roots was grafted another slice of Nicaraguan history: the Sandinista Revolution.
After the revolution ended—I’m sorry, I’m being told the revolution lives on, viva la revolución.
When the civil war ended, the Christian! Socialist! Solidary! government enacted laws redistributing what seemed like about half of landowner property to the lower and middle classes.
This is how, I was told, many Nicaraguans who were not the Becklins came to own many of the properties in Colonia Becklin, but this might not be true at all.
What my research suggests is that the Sandinista government of the 1980s only redistributed farmland (and boy did they), so my understanding of Colonia Becklin might be entirely misguided.
Let me start again.
But onto Colonia Becklin’s colonial historical roots have been grafted slice after slice of Nicaraguan economic history—downturn after downturn.
The Sandinista government of the 1980s stabilized annual inflation rates of 14,000% by implementing a new currency, but their progress was wiped out by Hurricane Joan, which poured itself out onto the middle of the country.
Later, other economic downturns, both local and global, on top of rigorous squatter’s rights protections in the country, forced the sale or relinquishment of several properties by the Becklin family to other Nicaraguans.
So it was one of these from whom my parents rented for $900 a month what my father jokes was my mother’s dream house: a white-painted Southern Mansion.
And he’s sort of right: The house has big white (brick) columns, a two-story stucco façade, and two guest bedrooms.
But it was also more like the Southern mansion of the 1920s, because it was dependent on screened, barred, always-open windows and doors and lush front and back gardens for ventilation rather than central air-conditioning.
We had a gas stove and oven, and we had to buy our own hot water heater, install our own ceiling fans, and only, eventually, long after we moved in, purchase a single-room in-wall AC unit for the kitchen.
When we moved, my parents shipped in special help like it was an episode of HouseHunters: International.
My mom’s mother, Mimi, had been an interior designer in the 70s, and though she had since long retired into the multi-level marketing online greeting card business, she flew down to direct the choices and applications of paint and the positions of furniture.
I had a black-detail-on-white corner room three inches narrower than my sister’s teal, dark brown, and lime green middle room with zebra stripe sheetsets, but I got much more natural light (and sound).
The most vivid memory I have of our first year in that house is of my dad, sitting in his new office downstairs, already cluttered with loose paper, bookshelves with Tolkien’s entire and illustrated works, pressing and stapling fresh-cut screen into custom-built metal or wooden windowframes for every window in the house.
I’m trying to avoid writing about Becklin as a kind of symbol, a safe-haven, a sanctuary.
For two reasons.
On one hand, that would be reductive—for all of Becklin’s positive qualities, hurt still got in.
Many of the missionaries that lived in Becklin ended up not being able to afford or emotionally handle living in Nicaragua, and the turnover in the neighborhood reflected the stress of the mission.
There were always more failed Crusades than successful ones for lack of funds and morale.
The forest wasn’t clean and the garbage collectors didn’t come on a regular schedule, which meant both the cats and the wild animals—bats, opossums, squirrels, iguana, locusts, stray dogs—had equal claim to the outside as anybody else.
My friend Natalie shattered her front teeth roller-skating on her tile front porch.
For a long time, just about anybody could walk up into the Colonia to do door-to-door sales—and one time, a group of robbers had finished cleaning out the Sharpes’ house right as Anne arrived home from work.
They pointed a gun at her as they left, and from then on the neighborhood contributed to a guard fund, and the Becklins put in two boom barriers and speed bumps with a closet-size guard shack between them.
Each resident received a sticker for their cars, and Becklin became a much quieter neighborhood.
Having every window open for air meant that every window was also open for sound.
For much of my time there, the Keelings, another family, had left their cats behind, unfixed, who multiplied and lived in the sewer grates outside.
Colonia Becklin had two defining features.
The first is “The Middle,” a woods enclosed by the cobblestone quarter the road made.
The Middle had trees and trees: eucalyptus on the south side, ceiba and Guanacaste in the south and west, mango on the north.
Inside the middle were desire paths that criss-crossed from house to house.
One reached between my house and the Vanderweeses, a family of seven whose younger daughter Kaki was in my class.
We often worked on projects together, hosted one another, and had parties.
Another reached between the Oscar’s house and the Chens and Henzlers, who all played cards together with Kaki’s older sister.
When I was in middle school, we became part of this card-playing group, and the bunch of us would walk to each other’s houses to play Euchre, Up and Down the River, Catan, Spades, and Pictionary.
I learned a lot from them, not just about strategy, but about how to be a real person who has friends.
When I hosted, it was most often for a movie or marathon of a franchise film like Batman, Narnia, or Lord of the Rings.
I can reach back into this time via Facebook Messenger, but the social skills are absolutely abysmal, which is to be expected from a 14-year-old who homeschools and has no friends and no smartphone.
Sometimes we met in the Middle, like for a bonfire.
At the end of the semester, we would compile our paper notes to burn on the one cobblestone road that led to nothing—straight down from the road into the heart of the Middle.
Next to it, for the longest time, was a strong, tall pile of building sand, the kind you mix into cement.
We knew starting a fire there would be easy to put out with the sand and wouldn’t spread on the ground because of the stone.
The other pyrotechnics would happen at the tennis court (no net) at the east edge of Colonia Becklin, right up against the edge of South Highway.
The tennis court was maybe ten feet up above the road, and there was a wall separating us, but it didn’t stop us from losing frisbees over it into the road and peering over when, one day, a horrible van accident collided with the ledge.
Blood streamed down the back of the broken glass of the white van, and an ambulance carted some people in very bad condition away.
Other accidents happened too—a semitruck carrying dry cement flipped up near where my friend Jake lived.
When accidents hit near Becklin, the whole neighborhood shook.
We’d talk about it at school.
Jake remembered people not stopping to help the injured driver, but bringing bags to clean up the dry cement for themselves instead.
Other fires were less controlled.
One squirrel crossed power wires and fried on the spot, a flat gray board of supercooked rodent that fell onto the ground in front of the Izzos’ house.
In the Izzos’ back yard, Nat and I would use the Axe body spray to create a small flame-thrower with which we lit kindling for fun.
We met on the tennis courts to light fireworks, unsupervised.
In Nicaragua, there are few regulations around the size or type of fireworks that may be sold, so between Christmas and New Years small El Dragon fireworks kiosks opened along every major road to sell pyrotechnics.
On the tennis courts, we’d bend the metal ends of long sparklers so that we could spin them around—the earliest video I still have in my camera roll, taken with the front camera of an iPod touch.
The worst fire none of us started: a tree fire inside the trunk of a Guanacaste right on the side of the road.
If we had let it burn unchecked, a huge limb hundreds of feet high would have fallen on our neighbors house.
It was one of the few times I saw the whole of Colonia Becklin out at once, united—carrying water from various houses in buckets and tubs, borrowing ladders, to put out the blaze, braving even the bees’ nests in the same tree that it disturbed.
The Middle didn’t stay our stomping grounds for long.
When I was in high school, the Becklins leased the land to coffee growers, who began at the outermost edge of the middle and began to plant the entire perimeter with young coffee plants.
Little by little the concentric coffee circles reached into the Middle—our entrypoints closed, the paths and trails grew over.
It was easier to walk the circle than cut through the Middle.
But sitting on the curb, waiting for carpool, over the course of the year the plants eventually flowered, then turned into the berries that grow right on the branch, then turned red.
And then, coming home from school, they’d all be picked.
One time, my friend Lindsey and I picked up the mantle for door-to-door sales.
The Woughters made brownies more than any family I knew, and my own family made limeade with limes from a tree in our back yard, so we combined forces and went around the circle selling them.
It was that day that I realized the second of Becklin’s major features: its single-floor plan houses.
Every house had a huge living room on the left side and a right side two-story setup with a 3-bed, 3-bath upstairs and a kitchen, office, and 2-bed, 2-bath downstairs.
While the center hallways were in the same spot above one another in the center of these houses, none of them were actually constructed identically—none of them were the same color, none had just the same windows, porches, staircases, or kitchen arrangements.
Some kitchens had islands, others peninsulas, others a single built-in cabinet.
Some had full front porches and tiny back porches; others were the opposite.
Some had more doors to the outside than others.
All of them were barred on the windows and doors, and all of them were made of sound concrete and tile so as to be cool and earthquake-proof.
By the outside, you would have no idea that each of these houses shared the same basic blueprint.
Though each one shared the same amount of concrete blocks and rebar as the next, they were styled differently in the front.
The Dunsworths’ house looked like Renaissance Revival.
The Sharpes had a single turret bathroom on the second floor, and our house had columns in front, but the Henzlers and Brachts, whose front yards were chain-link fenced in, had no columns at all.
There seemed to be no reason that each of these facades was developed differently—they all concealed a similar type of family.
A white, North American missionary family with school-age children.
You knew a house by its features only if you didn’t know who lived there: One was the Mosts’, then the Hennings’, then the Woughters’.
The house with two turrets like a castle became the Izzos’, then the McWhorters’.
And if you knew them well enough, you carpooled with them to the school many of us attended.
As co-owners of a one-day-only limeade-and-brownies business, Lindsey and I were let into Becklin houses that had only been a façade, a mystery, to us for years before.
Next to the Vanderweeses, a german man lived with his Nicaraguan wife.
He worked either for the German embassy or the German school—the flags on his car indicated such.
We knew nothing about them until stepping inside, and realizing then that they were a family of artists—a rainforest mural spanned the entire walls of the stairwell on the way up to his office.
The house next to theirs was fenced in, the only name we had “Oso,” “Bear,” the Doberman at the gate.
And that’s how we identified any other houses gated and covered in front by foliage: the dogs.
The pinscher and the chihuahua in the house that connected to a gated orchard guarded by a dalmation, or the two shih-tzus on the Vanderweeses other side.
All the other houses were guarded by rumor—an instrument maker on the corner across from the water tower, even the Becklin Mansion itself like the Wonka Factory: nobody ever goes in; nobody ever comes out.
Since I graduated, I’ve been back to Becklin only a few times.
When my sister was still in high school, I visited my family thrice.
But after she graduated, my parents moved to Vistas De Momotombo, north of Managua next to the retreat center where they worked, and there was hardly any excuse to go back—many friends had aged out, the Chens combined their home and restaurant business in a house on South Highway.
Becklin’s families have turned over so much that part of why my parents moved out, beyond being closer to work and not needing to be near the missionary school anymore, was because they couldn’t bear to live in a neighborhood all their neighbors had deserted.
And deserted isn’t too strong a word.
The political unrest in 2018 had been the sign many missionaries were looking for to pack up and go.
My parents and I still find this odd—in fact, we mourn—that a political movement that did not threaten Americans (unless they crossed the picket line) would persuade so many ‘lifers’ to leave for good with their families.
One of the biggest failures of the missionary community during the political unrest in 2018 was that missions agencies recalled their plants back to the US, and independent missionaries lost the funding to stay.
There was an exodus not just of expatriate Americans advised by the US embassy to leave the capital city, but of missionaries who worried that their children’s educations and their day-to-day work, which were subsequently heavily audited by the Nicaraguan government to verify that they weren’t secretly CIA political actors, were too disrupted to continue.
My sister remembers best what happened when my parents’ mission tried recalling my mom and dad.
Of every house in Becklin, ours was one of the only ones without a tile or concrete upstairs floor.
Ours was a single layer of varnished hardwood, which she pressed her ear to in my parents’ room to listen to my dad, furious, raising his voice for one of the first times in our memory, to refuse to go.
Why would they leave when the hammer was about to drop on all of the people my parents had built relationships?
When I have been back since, the Middle is overgrown, but caffeinated.
Two major, huge trees, the Guanacaste and the ceiba, have both fallen, taking tons of foliage with them and changing the landscape of light as it hits the ground, the middle, the road.
My mom’s best friends, Bethany, Beth, Susan, and Anne, and her colleagues Diane and Cari, had all moved out, and the concentric circles of coffee plants choked the Middle’s playspace, now 7 rows deep.
The trails, the lawnmowed clearing-slash-soccer field, the tire swings, the old bonfire spots, had all been covered by brush, vines, weeds, and garden clippings and cuttings from every house in the neighborhood.
If there are still missionary families in Becklin, they keep to themselves.
The only Becklin remaining is the Facebook Becklin—the small groups, the private pages, the messenger boards and text threads in flip phones.
Grainy iPad 2 and iPhone 4 photo rolls remind us of nights fooling around with Wii’s JustDance 2, arguing over a game of chess, and taking snacks from one house to another.
Yard sales that circulated some of the same household items between families.
Many of these memories are bittersweet—my mom said she can’t bear to put on another yard sale for a friend, selling all their belongings for them after they leave like she did in 2018.
Estate sale after estate sale for the death of a family’s commitment to doing the work of continuing to live in Nicaragua.
The deaths of ministries—feeding programs that were never passed off to a local team, orphanages and women’s shelters that never became self-sustaining.
Schools that still struggle to get teachers, much less accredited.
It betrays the flaw in many missionary ethics—that home is apart from the people you serve.
The generations that followed, some of them, have learned the lesson, committed to being better, to being and becoming a part of the communities they serve by living in and with and among them.
My parents made this shift late, but they have made it, and it’s brought them friendships they maybe secretly thought they’d never make back when all those whites left.
A Room Writes To the Holidays, and Back
Dear Good Friday,
When I asked to exist, you were patient.
Sincerely,
GLASS CLOSET
Dear Glass Closet,
I remember when
SINCERELY,
good fri.
Dear Spring Break,
Sincerely,
Grnd. Flr. S. Bdrm.
Cond. San Verona
Dear Ground Floor South Bedroom in Condominio La Verona,
Greetings from the far side of a long adjacent night, a long silence, and a long hug. That second coming out was harder than the first, wasn’t it? I should say, since there have been plenty, coming out as having a crush on someone is in some ways harder than coming out in general. The first coming out, in Second Floor West Bedroom in Colonia Becklin, had been the occasion for theirs, and for their second (gender trouble), but this second took an extra year to marinate (though it could’ve happened—and maybe should’ve—then). But of course, as always, he didn’t want to ruin things. Oh, blessed silence, that sweet gap between confession and response. The gap between windowpane and screen, between the crack in a door ajar as they changed clothes.
“What do you want to do about it?” And of course, as always, he didn’t want to ruin things. “Kiss you,” he should’ve said. This being true since 9th grade. This being true since New Year’s Eve, when they laid out on the bed waiting while he took pictures he hid in a separate Google Photos album to treasure instead of them, the person. You didn’t have the right answer then, so he came out for the first time to their parents to be the gauge, in Downstairs Kitchen—how would they respond to the inevitable? as you and they listened from above.
Sincerely,
Spring Break
Dear Thanksgiving,
Dear American Blue,
Dear Winter Break,
Dear Single Metaphorical Doorframe,
ENTRADA / ENTRY
There’s this picture my mom posts on Facebook every year to commemorate the anniversary of the date we left everything in Florida to become missionaries in Nicaragua. This year, it was 17 years ago.
In the photograph, in blown-up low-resolution, I’m draped over four suitcases on the curb, “guarding” them, looking back at the camera.
Emma, my sister, is perched on top of one of the luggage, squinting with a babytooth smile through her pink plastic glasses.
I can't even really remember that first flight; I would have been about 8 or 9.
Emma was even younger than that, obviously, ‘cause she's younger than me.
Part of the trouble with my memory is that I don’t remember much about that specific trip, because I best remember the constants—the airports—and the slow changes made to them.
How Miami was under construction for so many years, the gradual addition of the do-it-yourself customs kiosks, global entry, and TSA pre-check in Atlanta, Miami, and Fort Lauderdale: Those weren't always there.
What's remained true, to my memory, is the $10 entry fee to come into Nicaragua on a tourist visa.
A tourist visa is worth 3 months, so a lot of Europeans backpack there, and the small talk on the plane is usually worth it.
The problem is that I don’t remember anything I said—the memories depersonalize, the moments are disembodied.
SALIDA / EXIT
Leaving the country is even easier than getting in, for Americans.
Always have to add that caveat.
For Americans.
I remember walking past lines of Nicaraguans at the American embassy hoping to get an exit visa to the US.
In the airport, once you've checked in at the counter, you walk past your last chance to buy generic souvenirs from artisans who have kiosks in the airport lobby, and past the food court, and past then a circle of 10 or 12 busts of major Nicaraguan figures, in-between two high-hung, wall-length portraits: one of Ruben Dario, the modernist poet who I’m told memorized the dictionary as a child, and one of Augusto Sandino, the generations-removed revolutionary figure for whom the currently-in-power Sandinista party is named.
ADUANA DE INGRESO O SALIDA / ARRIVAL OR DEPARTURE CUSTOMS
The Sandinista party is the reason for the following travel advisory issued by the US Embassy in Nicaragua: Country Summary: The government of Nicaragua arbitrarily enforces laws for political purposes.
Throughout Nicaragua, government officials and law enforcement continue to target those opposed to the rule of President Ortega.
The government and its affiliated groups have been reported to:….
• Arbitrarily seize and/or search private property including personal phones and computers for anti-government content.
• Arbitrarily charged individuals with terrorism money laundering, and organized crime offenses for political reasons.
After you recover your luggage from baggage claim, there’s one last room we tense up to walk through before we hit the curb, pickup lanes, and parking lot.
It’s a side room to the left, past the duty-free liquor stores selling the national brand of rum, Flor de Caña.
In it are four conveyor belt x-ray machines, through which every bag, not just your carry-ons, must be processed, and it’s the government’s last chance to seize the goods in your luggage before you enter the country.
It’s happened to us before, but never as badly as has happened to others—laptops and cameras, electronics and valuables confiscated, reasonlessly, held in indeterminate detention.
Friends have worked for weeks, driving out to the airport warehouses, in attempts to get their luggage released.
NOMBRES (GIVEN NAME)
I don't have a very transferable name.
The first one, Peter, is translateable, but not transliterable.
Pet-err, I’ve been called by a few.
Pedro is what I ask most Spanish-speakers to call me, but I’m not allowed to call myself that to the customs agent.
I have to be Pet-air, because that’s what’s written down.
Not that I’m blaming anybody for the hang-up.
It’s our fault, as English-speakers, that our vowels have so many pronunciations.
Just in that last sentence, the capital ‘E’ squealed ‘eee’, married in an ‘A’ to keep it going in “speak,” married down with an ‘R’ for an ‘urr,’ closed out its own category (“vowel”) in a cough of an ‘eh,’ and checked out entirely from the word “have.” One time, a Nicaraguan who knew me transliterated as “Pee-tair” made a wooden keychain for me with my phonetic name wood-burned into it, “Pitter.” So don’t even get me started on my middle name, Douglas.
Saying it in Spanish almost approximates its Gaelic origin, dubh glas, “dark stream,” and the irony of this is not lost on me, that my given names translate to “rock [from] dark stream.” Especially since this wasn’t intentional.
Douglas is just my dead grandad, who died the year before I was born.
Peter’s a storybook character.
APELLIDOS (SURNAME)
My third and last name is hard for the opposite reason as my first two.
In much of the world, including Nicaragua it is a first name, which caused much confusion.
From third to twelfth grade, every first progress report I received from my school in October, a yellow manila folder with the little red lash tie, I had to cross out a small ‘d’ tacked onto the end of my name.
“Edgard,” a compromise between the English “Edgar” and the common Spanish “Edgardo.”
NACIONALIDAD / NATIONALITY
Here we go.
This is always the question.
I don’t think there will ever be a perfect, easy answer to this blank.
It’s the same difference as the one between my names—there is one right answer, and a world inside.
Answer (1.
Legal).
I am American.
There were a couple moments in college where I wanted this answer to mean more than it does—briefly meant ‘American’ in the Jose Marti, “we are all American because these two continents are called America” way, and then I eschewed the term for the transliteration of the Spanish specific, “Unitedstatesean.”
INTRO SCREEN
In this story, there are turtles.
Unfortunately, your narrator must build to the turtles, withholding them from you for now, so that the turtles hang loosely over your head like a wire installation in an airport walkway in Florida.
The turtles will be present shortly, but for now they are a prop to distract you from the walk towards the baggage claim, the recovery of the baggage, the journey away, toward a place you might accidentally refer to as ‘home’ while you’re on vacation in a city or state you have a tenuous, merely financial relationship with for the time being, though one day you may retire there.
CHOOSE YOUR CHARACTER
An expatriate, a diplomat, and a missionary are not so different.
Take Don, Brian, and Bruce, for example:
CHARACTER 1
Don is an expatriate.
He is an American who married into a Nicaraguan family, which is actually a German expatriate family who has been in Nicaragua for long enough to have sieved into the grain of the nation to be called such.
The generational differences between Don’s family members are mainly linguistic: his father-in-law speaks German and Spanish, while his wife speaks Spanish, Don himself speaking it as his second language, and his children being raised on both, homeschooling in English but living in Spanish.
Do not ask too closely about the date of his father-in-law’s immigration, but be grateful you have access to an heir of a quaint but large and profitable resort in a mountain city north of the capital.
CUSTOMIZE (#1)
There are more versions of Don: There is a Canadian barber who moved to Nicaragua in 2021 to “escape” the shelter-in-place orders imposed by his government.
There is a Korean father who works as a manager in a clothing factory on the outskirts of town, whose family all dress like lifestyle outdoors-people.
There is a Jacques, a French engineer, whose wife has a bowl cut, maroon lipstick, and two sons who attend the French school on the south east side of Managua.
There is Jeff, a high school administrator who takes positions at various international schools as he wishes—his sons were born in Cambodia, but they were raised in California before they moved to Nicaragua.
CHARACTER 2
Brian is a diplomat.
He is the head of the Marine unit stationed in the American Embassy in Nicaragua.
He has a buzz cut and is built like a cartoon of a marine chief, like Spike the dog character in Tom & Jerry.
He too is biracially married: His wife and family, which were able to move to Nicaragua with him (it is of less security risk than other stations allied to Nicaragua, like Iran and Cuba), are of part-South Asian nationality.
They are all kind, but Brian is tough, hard, a natural leader but serious about discipline and paperwork (this will play to an advantage).
CUSTOMIZE (#2)
Previous men who have filled the role of the diplomat in this case study were Eric, a Mormon with gray hair, and a tall single man who is chief of security at the US Embassy when the Nicaraguan capital erupts in protest in 2018, but had been previously stationed in Baghdad and Pakistan (for one-year terms, much shorter than the three-year terms allowed in nations with fewer security risks).
CHARACTER 3
Bruce is a missionary with an independent Baptist organization that began relief work in Nicaragua after Hurricane Mitch, the year his son was born, and founded a camp and retreat center in 2007 upon the donation of $200,000 to purchase 160 acres of land northwest of Managua.
Bruce has been balding since the nineties, but at 6 feet tall, most Nicaraguans can’t see the spot at his crown or how thin the top of his hair is when he’s standing up.
Before moving to Nicaragua, he and his wife taught at a Christian school, and his training as a biologist lives on in his garden, where he grows coffee, cocoa, wild blackberries, bougainvillea, plumeria, tends a birdbath, and grills.
When he became the director of the camp in 2009, he performed the booking, bookkeeping, maintenance, landscaping, and planning for future stages of the camp as more team members arrived.
CUSTOMIZE (#3)
Bruce’s team has shuffled the deck of character cards three times over the past 15 years: Larry, Andy, Mark 1, Steve, Richard, Pat, Dan, Jason, Mark 2.
Like the Oregon Trail video game, each man comes with a different temperament, a similar but varied origin story, and a skill of some kind.
Steve is an Engineer; Mark 2 is an Accountant; Larry and Andy are Experienced; Pat is a Doctor, Mark 1 is Learned.
Bruce is Learned, too, and an Outdoorsman.
CHOOSE A SIDE CHARACTER
These three categories—missionary, expatriate, diplomat—always blur, though.
For example:
SIDE #1
Liam is a missionary who has nearly-permanent residence in Nicaragua; he works as the computer scientist and director of a missionary school in the southwest side of Managua.
At the missionary school, he met his wife and had four children.
They have grown up in Nicaragua, his children, but in a way Liam too—he moved there when he was just in his twenties.
SIDE #2
David, a physician, is of Costa Rican nationality, but he and his wife were educated in the United States and lived in a neighborhood of Managua called Nejapa providing medical consultations and education to the surrounding people with a not-for-profit.
His three children also grew up essentially Nicaraguan, but they left for college like any expatriate, diplomat, or missionary kids might (to Harvard, Yale, and NYU, respectively).
SIDE #3
Liam’s boss, Eric, has been in Nicaragua even longer, and built a square compound for himself and his family that expands every year.
From the outside, it is neutral-colored on a plot of undeveloped dirt, but the inside is bright and lush, courtyarded with running water and hammocks over tile.
SETTING INTRODUCTION
These three categories are not arbitrary.
They exist at the intersection of a reality of a certain kind of person: the kind that has the privilege to cross borders more easily than any Nicaraguan, and the kind of person that puts their kids in Boy Scouts.
(Enter Turtles.)
BACKSTORY
These men take their sons on nature trips through the Boy Scouts of America, who have a place in Nicaragua because there is, technically, American land – the Embassy.
When one crosses through the car security checkpoints, where their bumpers are swabbed for explosives and chemical residues and mirror-checked underneath the chassis, or when they swing open the 900-pound doors and send their belongings through the x-ray machine so they may emerge onto the Embassy plaza, they are effectively on US soil.
It is a high hill with an ambassador’s mansion on top, with a pool and a baseball field and a satellite tower.
According to now-deceased president of Venezuela Hugo Chavez, there is an earthquake generator underneath this hill, which overlooks all of Managua.
YOUR STORY BEGINS
So make up a boy.
He can be any man’s son.
He can be all these men’s son.
He can be any size.
You will play this character, and by the end of your campaign he will have looked out the front flap of his tent onto the pacific ocean, five foot waves at the shore, late-eyed from the night before, watching sea turtles and leatherbacks dig to lay their leather-eggs into the dark brown sand out of the sea, at the treeline where palms overlook the shore.
He will have felt a rustle underneath his visiting friend’s tent, and spied a hatchling peeking out from the lip, will have yelled at this, will have watched it wobble to the sea, standing over it as birds circled.
He will have no thought than this: “this young, new thing must live.”
TBC
“I’m not a Bibliolater but…” or “Will From Kansas”
There is nothing you will read here that I have not cried about already.
I’d been working at this Bible camp since seventh grade.
It was the place I figured out I was gay, quietly, in a conversation between me and God.
(That’s a thing for Protestants—that we all believe we have a direct line to God in what we call the priesthood of believers.
In fact, the only intercessor we’ve got is Jesus, who sits at God’s side and at the same time is God.
It’s a lot, and it’s a whole thing.) The point is, God has always been part of the conversation between me and queerness.
And then Will tried to step between us and straighten me out.
Will was a senior in college when my dad was a freshman.
They both attended a conservative Christian school in Clearwater, Florida, which specialized in the natural and marine sciences, as most colleges in central Florida on the literal banks of Tampa Bay do.
I almost went to Clearwater Christian College, was accepted there, before it shuttered, transferring its wilted number of last students to other conservative Christian schools: Cedarville in Ohio, Pensacola in the panhandle, Covenant and Bryan in Chattanooga, Bob Jones in Greenville, SC.
Some even went as far as Liberty, in Lynchburg, the evangelical home of Christian youth political movements and one of the only Christian colleges that comes close to being like a state school.
When my dad and Will attended CCC, it was in its prime.
My dad became a biology and bible teacher at a Christian school in his hometown, and Will became a paleontologist and entomologist.
They both dug whale fossils out of the muddy sandbanks of the Peace River, whose underbelly had been upturned by early phosphate mining.
“Yeah, no, being conservationist wasn’t political back then,” my dad remembers.
“We all saw the crying Indian commercial.
Now that’ll break your heart!” Dad planted trees in summer across Polk County, reforesting and reclaiming land that had been moonscaped by Mosaic and other fertilizer producers.
The trees he planted are scrub forests now, cut through by a parkway I take to get to camp.
Gypsum stacks, a byproduct of phosphate mining, loom like the idea of Santa God, the watching judge, who knows when you’ve been bad or good (so be good).
While my dad was coaching varsity basketball at a Christian school, Will was digging up dinosaurs, prehistoric tortoises.
When my dad left the United States to train beekeeping pastors in Latin America with his young family, Will took his to work on the insect displays at the Creation Museum in Petersburg, Kentucky.
Both are all in on Young Earth Creationism: the cosmology that says the universe was made in a week and is less than 15,000 years old, full stop.
And look, hey—if you’re not going to yuck any other religion’s yum of how we all got here, you can’t yuck this one’s.
But it does presume a lot–specifically, it presumes God is very involved in what’s going on with you.
So Will is exactly the kind of person who’s not interested in ‘agreeing to disagree’: For him, the stakes of every difference have eternal weight.
Will is a big guy.
He’s a Gen-X, 6-foot tall white man with freckles almost drowned out by the tan of being outside in Florida.
He spends so much of his waking life in the natural world, clearing trails, building windows in the forest so that young people, especially those who live the kinds of lives most Americans do—divorced from nature, from the direct exhale of trees and the protein foam at the edge of a lake—can see what he sees.
A two-foot section of vertical PVC is a web-hole.
A flat slab of plywood lifts on one side to reveal the worms, millipedes, and beetles decomposing the earth underneath.
Once I went scorpion-hunting three times one night with Will and 25 middle schoolers after dark, flashlights held to our temples so we could watch for reflective arachnid eyes.
Will kept the UV light so we could see the scorpions fluoresce.
There are more spiders hidden in the grass we tread than we know.
Being a counselor at a Bible camp, I’ve been taught to find inroads to people’s interiority quickly.
Common interests, casual open-ended questions, and careful listening – they’re what made me a good student journalist, tour guide, and club leader in college.
This also gets me into trouble.
I haven’t had a first date before, because I find myself trying to ‘solve’ the puzzle of a person before I even tell them “I like you and would like to know you better.” I’ve already collated their life story and emotional needs on a mental “Camper Card”: Name, Cabin, Profession of Faith?, Needs:, Important Information.
Will is less like a camper, though, and more like those spiders.
He waits for you to come to him.
You could find him if you looked hard enough, stepping carefully.
It wasn’t until three years into our relationship as colleagues that I found the right flashlight that, angled rightly, made his eyes flash.
Will is in a perpetual search for sanctuary from the world: from the literal noise of industry, sure, but also from the biblical capital-w World.
This “The World,” which is for WASPs other American cultures, is ruled by “the Enemy,” and seeks to destroy young believers’ faiths.
Will is generally skeptical of Democrats and young adults, but the question that makes his eyes flash is what made mine flash, back in 10th grade when I found being ‘right’ about God meant no one would ever suspect I was part of a sexual minority: “Where are the ‘false teachers’?” When I finally stumbled back into this question as an adult, Will was waiting.
It was CoViD summer, the second one.
We’d had camp the first one, because it was Florida, and as far as we knew, as long as we stayed in small groups and broad daylight, we could have camp.
All the counselors and support staff wore masks, which we bleached every night, which I wore even while lifeguarding, when I was standing around campers.
In 2020 I only found out on weekends what was going on in the streets, because I wasn’t on my phone while I set up games, lifeguarded for 8 hours a day, moved campers back and forth.
Blackout Tuesday came and went on Instagram while I was in the dining hall, at the lake setting up the inner tube and speed boat, going to lunch between shifts, reapplying sunscreen for the afternoon, and watching four lightning trackers from the chair: two apps, one handheld, one horizon.
I tell you this because while I was catching up on Instagram stories only in the evening office hours, after the lake’s trampolines had been re-anchored and the canoes flipped up on shore, Will was listening to talk radio, reading Facebook posts in opposition to the Black Lives Matter movement, and imbibing Christian satire on the subject of that and masks and the Biden presidency.
We both thought a lot about justice, from different angles, the same way we both thought about sanctuary.
Writing Assignment 2
To Ben,
I’m tired, the kind not of body but of worry.
I don’t worry much or often; there are enough verses written with commands about sparrows & lilies, commands to distance the day from future trouble, for me to fantasize our own destruction.
Worry today is a feeling of helplessness, a disgust with myself for caring wrongly and a repulsion to the consequences of doing so.
I woke up early, fully clothed, to let Leonard out and call the vet and take him there and calm his squeals and stay his tongue and pay the bill and drive him home and crate him.
There are mornings when a shower is a balm, a meditation on the world & the day ahead.
Today, I just washed myself with soap & redressed.
A dog is not a child.
He cannot be explained to.
I have outgrown the age of not believing, but now I have to choose what it will be.
Today I had no time for the slow beautiful wane of moisture on my windshield, for the second blue sky in a week of gray.
I am just now learning that apologies aren’t a cure-all.
I love to imagine that your own side-thorns can’t compare to my thistle of living.
You talked about your almost-friends—have you gotten any closer? To knowing them, that is, to friendship— not to the evangelism that your parents expect you to impart.
Tell me of our biologies— I want to know what I am made of— I want to know what parts we share.
You and your brother gut a home for remodeling — flip me, so that my self-Zestimate might go up.
This is too much of me to ask one friend.
I shan’t photocopy my worry for you anymore.
I have languished enough.
Bear you witness to my bared heart.
I want you to protest against me — I want someone to push my reform.
Write me an amendment— I may be afraid of the consequences, but trust-bust my monopoly on my life I hold.
It was never meant to be just mine.
I write to you, as if my representative, I pray to you, because I swore off looking at God.
Be my oathbreaker— may my no be yes and my yes be no.
Take me by the hand, remind me how good I had it in my Father’s house.
Coming back to prayer after months of quiet stubbornness is like picking up running— a fated puke awaits me, and it will feel so good, how gross it feels.
I constantly refuse to turn my eyes upward, unless I’m in church— but there’s a skylight all around me, not just in the nave of the chapel— where else does the light that stains the glass come from, and what stains the glass?
Fixed and Forgiven
The name had slipped as if we didn’t keep secrets from one each other.
I had been lamenting that in our friend group we didn’t really get to know each other’s significant others (Bethany has been dating a guy from Polytech for almost a year, and I’ve met him no more than three times).
There’s this thing called chisme, which is like gossip, but outlandishly aggrandized, and I avoid spreading that, but I’m bad at holding secrets about who likes whom because I’m not in high school anymore and adults shouldn’t be afraid--so in a list of boyfriends and crushes I’ve never met, I listed one that I’d been asked to censor.
I’m really sorry and I know it’s a betrayal of your trust… if you need some time away from me … I understand.
I wake up to questions about how Morgan reacted to the name, and, having already apologized for breaking their confidence, I answer honestly (she didn’t care) and sleep for another thirty minutes before getting up.
I wake up to texts saying that it was ok, that she forgives me, that we are still on for breakfast at 8:45 on Thursday.
Then, as I reflect on how we both handled the situation and on how mature we are, I wake up again.
okay i’m not trying to be that person but I didn’t accept your apology, I just appreciate that you told me and you’re trying to make it right.
10 Questions to Diagnose Your Spiritual Health
Introduction
The book from which this essay derives its title and
structure is probably exactly what you think it is.
1. Do You Thirst for God?
“Like a deer pants for streams of water, so my soul longs after you.” (Psalm 42) Being a person of faith in the postmodern, post-neoliberal era.
A Gordian Knot? Deconstruction: the sword of Alexander? Reconstruction: the aftermath? – A refusal to migrate beliefs in the face of destruction.
A defiance of both the e- and the ex-vangelical.
“EL” – a name for God; Beth(el): house of god.
“Body is a temple, of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom you received.” (1 Cor 6) He bodied that.
2. Are You Governed Increasingly by God’s Word?
“I open my mouth and pant, longing for your commandments.” (Psalm 119) Being a part of a transformational project—radical wealth redistribution or neocolonial? Even my father admits it’s a little bit Marxist to ask for money from white conservative Christians and spend it on free food for a dozen Nicaraguan cities.
“Truly, I say to you, there is no one who has not left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or lands…” (Mark 10) But...
whose house, and what land?
3. Are You More Loving?
“To love your neighbor as yourself is more important than all burnt offerings and sacrifices.” (Mark 12) Being a person who wishes to love, who was carefully taught not to love certain persons certain ways (“Anyone who looks at a woman lustfully…”, Matthew 5), and didn’t.
Whose hands, hours after swim time at summer camp, feigned the motions of obedience (“If your eye causes you to stumble…” Mark 9).
I have to ask: am I allowed to answer this question, honestly? “—the Spirit of Truth.
The world cannot accept him.” (John 14) Yeah, I think I am more loving.
More than plenty of people.
What a shot to the heart: This should’ve been the first question.
Truly, truly, I say, it is easier to measure the progress of love towards a loved one than it is toward a stranger.
“The greatest of these is love.” (1 Corinthians 13 + a billion plywood plaques) Scripture, adapted into vaguely dystopic worship- music videos.
Tell me not to love someone, some thing, some way.
I will find another.
Every time.
4. Are You More Sensitive to God’s Presence?
“Where can I go from your Spirit? Where can I flee from your presence?” (Psalm 139): a seventh-grade Bible- memory challenge.
We do it for grades and points.
A monthly newsletter reports our activities, scrubbed perfect for the White churches keeping our budget at 89%.
“You whitewashed tombs!” (Matthew 23) Nothing about the surveillance I leveled upon my sister, how I told her I was “training” her.
Pre-online Millennial hyper-vulnerability culture.
One casts being ‘sensitive’ goodly, but now: how to untrain Truman Show God’s camera, that red flashing light, from the back of my head?
5. Do You Have a Growing Concern for the Spiritual and Temporal Needs of Others?
“So what do people get for all their hard work and anxiety?” (Ecclesiastes 2) Turns in roads treated as forks.
Does a body deserve care? What juxtaposition, part two: Spiritual vs. Temporal.
Existential vs. Time-bound.
Meaning vs.Fate.
Interpretation vs. Doom.
A summer choice, every year between two benedictions.
“What does the Lord require of you?” (Micah 6) Choice 1) Fly 1000 miles “to love and serve the Lord.” Choice 2) Join the folks, entering homes with people who left their homes to ly 1000 miles “to love and serve the Lord.” The advantage we take of hospitality.
We call these “Teams.” What are Love and Service? “He has shown you what is good.” (Micah 6) A smug, wry equivalence from your speaker, sarcastic.
Love and Service are painting walls, singing in a language you don’t know, free candy.
The flipbook you use to show your American- dream house to a woman who scavenged plastic kiddie pool walls to make her own home.
In the 1950s, “Teams” were called “Crusades.” “Does not wisdom call out? Does not understanding raise her voice?”(Proverbs 8) We lack different things.
We learn different lessons in different orders.
Here, on a mission, you learn you are White.
I watch my sister sort acetaminophen by the dozen.
6. Do You Delight in the Bride of Jesus Christ?
“Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth!” (Song of Solomon 1) Isn’t it kinda gay that I’m gonna marry Jesus? (I know; I’m not the first to make this joke.
The mystics, those poets, they get it.
“Batter my heart, three-person’d God.” (Donne)) That’s not the question.
Bride in question (Bridezilla, iykyk), is “the” Church.
The first front tooth lost in a blue-carpeted basement.
The dark room, Veggietales.
A puppet show.
Elaborate Vacation Bible Schools pre-ordered from Concordia Supply, held up in customs.
Again, ends and means—a bribe, the “holy one, a messenger, coming down from heaven.” (Daniel 4) A thunderstorm on two panes of zinc roofing.
A competition in drowning between it and a mic and speaker system.
“The rain came down…and the winds blew and beat against that house.” (Matthew 7) Every verse prophecy, every past present.
Is a church a church if it has a drum kit instead of a choir? Is a church a church if it’s a school instead? Is a church a church if the pews are plastic chairs? “Where two or three gather in my name...” (Matthew 18) A hundred boys named Jesus, and it’s not weird unless you make it weird.
(They always make it weird.) This is a Jeremiad.
The thunderstorms are tears, and the thunder angels bowling.
The lightning: Jesus’s camera flashing—again He is watching.
Do I delight in a man who tells my father the only Bible inspired by God is in English, and we may not use another? Do I delight in knowing my father’s sermons by heart? They go like this:
7. Are the Spiritual Disciplines Increasingly Important to You?
Setting: Outside of time, or circa 3200 years ago.
An apparition to a man, doomscrolling.
A Calling and a Rejection (Steps 2 & 3 in the Hero’s Journey).
Our 2nd & 3rd family Bibles come from England, from old- language translators.
God is a Lion, or God made the world with Song.
Children, or children-sized adults, make a difference.
“Tell it to your children, and let your children tell it to their children, and their children to the next generation.” (Joel 1)
A SIGN.
A SIGN.
A SIGN.
A SIGN.
“Some spiritual gift to make you strong—” (Romans 1) Jars of Clay, clashing, crashing trumpets: the triumph of this sermon and an alt-rock band my father sewed into the helix of my ear.
My mother speaks to women—because here we gender the testimony of God— “Want to stay, willing to go, or willing to stay, want to go?” So we pack up our fleeces.
My favorite judge was left-handed, like me.
The Word from God was a sword, lost in my belly.
8. Do You Still Grieve over Sin?
“Have I not wept for those in trouble? Has my soul not grieved for the needy?” (Job 30) Sin, the first act I learned after my existence.
Meaning: missing the mark—for all our good intentions, we all have bad aim.
It’s on page 2 (Genesis 3) Jesus cried a bunch; did you know that? He wept and bellowed with anger at Lazarus’s tomb.
I wasn’t taught to do that.
Which Commandment is it that demands from me composure?
9. Are You a Quicker Forgiver?
It’s a literary-size math problem: 70 x 7 = rhetorical hyperbole.
A T-shirt company devotes itself to brand parodies—a game director owns each of them.
In red: “Ketchup With Jesus,” in blue: “Mayo Light Shine.” (Matthew 5) Jonah, the original Moby Dick, Prophet of the LordTM, was furious with God for his forgiveness.
“I knew you were gracious and compassionate, slow to anger, abounding in loving devotion.” (Jonah 4) It is a literary- size conflict: Man, orgive Man.
Man, orgive Society.
Man, forgive Self.
Man, forgive God.
I forgave myself in a hedge maze, a drizzle on the page in salt and freshwater.
Reading that holy Book, running along the same wall looking for the Door.
10. Do You Yearn for Heaven and to Be with Jesus?
“The Son of Man has no place to lay his head.”(Matthew 8) To my sister, our pasts are behind us.
She will not be called “missionary kid.” She has translated enough empty promises, waved for cameras.
She’s done being petted for being blonde and a darling Christian daughter.
But prophecy is written present tense.
I want you to ask me about me.
I watch her now.
I watch me now: This essay is a Biblically-accurate angel.
Trodding door-to-door down dirt cobble road past wood-post fences, like groups of Whites panhandling the Spirit in broken language.
After listening, women go back to sweeping the hard ground free of its dust.
I am apophatic: Heaven is not a cloud.
I am cataphatic: It is a city.
I am syllogistic: If there are trees and rivers and clothes in that heavenly city, that kingdom of glass and gates, won’t I have a body? “Let the one who is thirsty come, and let the one who desires the water of life drink freely.” (Revelation 22) Given there is no temple, sun, moon, closed gates, or tears, tell me, too, no money.
But to answer the question: of course.
(Hebrews 11) of course.
(2 Corinthians 5) of course.
(Psalm 61) of course.(Philippians 1) Could I go now?
article in a post-calamity trade journal OR training program script for post-calamity office newbs
Watercoolers sit on concrete bases along open walls, many blank ceramic or carpet tiles around them, so that they may particpate centrally to the mechanisms of life.
This is not a romance; watercoolers are no natural springs.
Watercoolers are false springs, and every seventh day when the water men arrive in their truck with the 25-gallon barrels of water from the spring, watercoolers hum with excitement, hoping they might be taken along with their spent, empty jugs to the real source, the real tap.
A watercooler knows that it is a facsimile of something living, and so it delights
when, instead of lifting the blue tab for cool water, a young boy accidentally lifts the red tab— in that moment when a splash of scalding water burns his small finger,
latched over the lip of the styrofoam cup (the cup can take it), and he winces.
A watercooler laughs to itself, for these are the only moments it has to feel like it has made a real choice— when a mistake is made.
Watercoolers begrudge isolation, along blank walls, facing a wide open floor,
as mirages of oases, puddles, really—puddles that dribble from their palsied lips, dispenser drip trays— they wish they were in corners, half-hugged by concrete, where secrets might be whispered.
Watercoolers do not know that secrets are shared around them, so they treats what is secret as common knowledge, and what is alive as mystic, and believe themselves agnostics.
A watercooler has a 28-page user manual that lists Energy-star certifications, which no one cares about.
A watercooler is subject to supply-chain disruptions: no one notices a watercooler until it has run out of water, when they shout and kick and rattle, tip, hoping
for a few droplets—and gosh, does it try to kick back— but it has been empty for months now.
Watercoolers, with their many parts made of metal and plastic, will dissolve one day, heaped onto rubble, or flooded by what they couldn’t ever make for themselves.
Watercoolers only bring joy to those who have no use for them—babies delighted by the deep burble of air lifting into the bottle jug, or passers-by who see a watercooler wherever they are, but don’t have to stay.
i have been angry with a tech bro
I am angry with tech bros
tech bros are ruining america
we already have known what we are
you can stop pretending now
in the
Lord of the Rings
, a way too thinly veiled allegory of the
second world war, Sauron, whose minions (corrupted elves called orcs
& corrupted men called wraiths) speak an invented pastiche of German
called Blackspeak, communicates with a second tower across the world
with a wizard who went bad, who, as a stand-in for Japan, is named
Saruman, via a crystal ball (the chief steward of Gondor aslo has
one, and listens in, and is also corrupted) called a PALANTIR.
PALANTIR TECHNOLOGIES was founded by a computer scientist, Stephen
Cohen, & billionaire Peter Thiel. the company specializes in ﬁbig data
analytics.ﬂ its stocks trade at about $25, & it employs 2500 people.
it's based in Denver. PALANTIR TECHNOLOGIES is used at the south
border of the United States with Mexico. as Sauron used the PALANTIR
to surveil the kingdom of Gondor, PALANTIR TECHNOLOGIES surveils
migrants & aids ICE in capturing undocumented persons & children.
blood & soil & water & code
soot & sediment & paint & smudge
spill & smear & dribble & soak
paste & obscure & trace & fog
follow & stain & crimson & murk
puddle dry & illuminated, hung. frame
& dangle
string & slap & rebar & screw
there is one sword Sauron fears-- ANDURIL. ﬁFlame of the West.ﬂ
a symbol of the lineage of male rulers, of kings. i have not yet
mentioned that Mordor, where Sauron lives, lies in the east,
and is allied with another eastern force called the Haradrim,
who ride elephants, & a pirate army. they are slaughtered by a
and Aragorn, heir to the throne, wielding ANDURIL.
ANDURIL INDUSTRIES was founded in 2017 by the ﬁ22nd richest
entrepreneur under 40,ﬂ Palmer Luckey, who designed Facebook-
owned virtual reality technology device & company Oculus. ANDURIL
INDUSTRIES supplies autonomous drones and surveillance towers to
the United States Air Force and Department of Homeland Security.
The Altius-700, unveiled yesterday, can carry 300% more electronic
warfare & munitions than the 600, and disable ﬁadversary systems...
with lethal and nonlethal effects,ﬂ and ANDURIL is ﬁproud to
continue innovating the future of ‚air launched effects.'ﬂ
bottles & dirt & shoes
bottles & shoes
the eyes are 100,000 cameras
the eyes are in the back of ICE's head
and a green box around your body
marked as you walk the desert
-- person 348
and a green frame around your face
as you stand in front of the camera
-- person 566
loaded with threats from your hometown
to prove to the asylum committee
paint rivers in the color of your choosing
your country chooses petroleum brown,
source code green, & crimson red.
all Sauron has is 9 dragons called Nazgul.they shriek
like missiles, deafening people and inspiring despair. if
only Sauron had a better initial public offering on the
Gondor Stock Exchange and a more well-rounded social media
marketing team, and if the wraiths wore Patagonia, instead
of hooded cloaks, the coalition of the Good wouldn't have
sought to defeat him. if only Sauron had better lobbyists
at the FCC & the SEC & the Senate Armed Forces Committee.
Justification
Library
“...honor, i plead guilty.”
to what charge?
i told the boy that their deaths could be explained.
i told him, too, that their deaths were one of a million other connected moments
i said that each of them was a sign, or a promise, or a hint
why did you say that?
i wanted him to know it was okay to cry,
i wanted him to —
i just didn’t know it would turn out like this.
elaborate.
all this time in litigation, after
all the crying, soul-searching, and the paid leave,
he understood that everything is connected, but
he believes that
all is connected to him.
isn’t it?
only if we believe it is
is that wrong?
bring in the witness.
I was there each time he cried, the boy.
and was there a lie told?
a lie in timing, yes, if not a lie in truth.
and what was the outcome?
the boy was assured.
what more?
the boy is not on trial.
is it not in the interest of this trial that we should know?
- -
In January, you heard the winds blow hard against the windows and doors, rattling them. It was
the perfect time to be outside, eyes closed on the warm black mesh of the trampoline, toes away
from the hot metal ring and springs holding it open, because the moment you got warm the wind
would whip it away. Even in winter, the sun bears down, and the days shorten only by a minute.
Keeping your eyes shut, the only thing you see is the red-green imprint on the back of your
e yelid, your arms pressed hard o ver your face, e yes and nose pressed into the elbow pits to
keep the sun off. From there you hear e very thing, the mango tree swishing at your feet and
the avoc ado swishing above your head, and the heavy thuds of fruit hitting the hard dirt and
scr aggly St. Augustine grass. A buzz zips past your ear-- a fruit fly, or a wasp, on its way from one
grounded fruit to another.
the y eat as little of the mango skin as they need to begin chomping at the flesh inside, the sticky
mass that strings out when you pul l it but cuts clean into spears or chunks if you get it right,
around the oblong pit, a tan teardrop.the wasps love, but many of your friends are al lergic to the
mango. Much of what grows in the tropics c auses a rash in the right dose. P ineapple, f or example,
whic h eaten enough will r ash raw your tongue & throat.Your neighbor, one of the ones you have
a cr ush on (the y couldn't hang out today), eats enough Warheads to do this as wel l -- you picture
their tongue held out, oo zing blood in speckle.
the image is interrupted by the cr ash of a big green avoc ado on the zinc roof top of your bodega,
the annex to the house that keeps a dusty bathroom with all the storage tubs stac ked in it, a
bac k porc h with the washer-dryer and the gas canister it runs on, and a walk-in closet where
the big free z er is.the doors scrape open in the dim light, and there's al way s a scuttle of the
startled iguana that lives between the dr ywall ceiling tiles and the rooftop. It's a per f ect oven f or
a cold-blooded tenant, which you prefer to any mammals that might take it up if it weren't f or
the green-and-blac k striped, sc al y dragon that watches you hang linens and thin cottons on the
c lotheswire.the bodega would be a maid 's quar ters, if things still worked that way.
You f eel a bump at your butt -- it's the dog, nosing your f or m sunk into the trampoline. From
beneath you look like a body pressing into water before the surface tension breaks. He snifi s
around, takes a whizz on one of the legs of the trampoline.the grass is long down there; the
tr adeofi of less direct sunlight is protection from the mower.Two kinds of grass grow in the yard:
the tall broadswords of stemmy St. Augustine, and the pric kl y lawngrass that cut through the
shorts we wore to school like a fork through tissue paper.
The Inhospitable Squirrel
There once was a very large, black and white Squirrel.
Squirrel was looking for somewhere to live, but all the other trees in the colonia were already inhabited by the Oropendulas, the Chocoyos, and the Opossums — not that Squirrel couldn’t find have shared, but that he wanted a place that was “only his.” 
He even ruled out trees the leaf-cutter ants’ paths sometimes crossed.
•
It came to pass that one day Squirrel noticed the large stone trunks that circled the wood. 
Long, thin, black branches connected the trunks, and the longer Squirrel thought about it, the more he became convinced they would make a the perfect residence. 
So he moved in.
Because the branches circled the wood, he could reach easily the northern mango, the southern eucalyptus, and the eastern monkey-paw from where he slept above the western banana.
•
Soon after, Squirrel saw a guardabarranco resting on the northern lip of the branches.
“Shoo!” he said, “Go alight on someone else’s tree.”
He then saw, on the branch below him, a leaf-cutter scout leading a new train of workers. 
Furious, he thought he should hang down to that wire and stop them.
But that’s when he closed the circuit — ZAP — and, stiff as a board, he fell to the cobble below.
Genesis - essay on first or second birth?
1
It’s the start of things,
morning in Serranías.
The humidity drapes the trees and grass and vines—
wet air slips like ribbons through the green iron gates
and curls around the lock and chains holding them shut.
This is called, as two children sit outside the gate,
on a ledge, waiting for
a car, the cool of the day.
2
There’s a pivot point, a bet
on the day the sky will open.
Stormwaters could come midday or overnight to pierce
a heavyhot cloudblanket that climbs the hills of Nejapa.
Like the image of a broken waterbed, there’s the mind,
which knows what could happen; then there’s happening.
Lay planks onto the stream.
Know you’ll soak your shoes.
3
There’s land for the toil
outside of Ciudad Sandino
and toiled it is. Across the lake in the view to the north
and in a gate logo, Momotombito fronts a volcano band,
her sister Momotombo whispers smoke, dribbles fire
incontinent black down her green back every century.
Her sulfur blends into the clouds
as it drools westward off her lip.
4
This land is kind-of promised;
its soft soil covers hard dirt
that here neem and mahogany roots cut through;
its well pumps potable water from an aquifer
up a white pumice rock tunnel, porous but hard,
to make semi-olympic amounts of chlorinewater.
Tall grass grows to be baled
but burns at a glance of flame.
Exodus
1
As soon as learning, forgetting.
This is where beginning and ending, Being and Not-Being, are Becoming.
Learn a bird by any name other than its own it calls to you, and you’ll forget it.
Bird supposes NotBird; NotBird supposes Bird.
Bird-NotBird supposes Birding, supposes ABird, AnyBird, SomeBird, AllBirds, NoBird.
ABird supposes ThisBird.
ThisBird supposes Me, Site, Time.
Me suppose ThisBird supposes Jazz, Basketball, MyFather.
ThisBird supposes Nest, ThisBitOfStringOnTheGroundIsPerfectForDanglingHomeInTheSky.
ThisBird screams MyNameIsNotOropendula; it is _______________.
ThisBirdName is Unforgettable yet ThisBirdName is Unrepeatable.
2
God supposes NotGod; NotGod supposes God.
God-NotGod supposes Theology, supposes AGod, AnyGod, SomeGod, AllGods, NoGod.
AGod supposes ThisGod; ThisGod is Unforgettable yet ThisGodName is Unrepeatable.
When Moses Received TenWords on AMountain, God Transmitted them to TheStones.
God supposes NotGod; Moses supposes NotMoses; HisPeople suppose NotMoses=DeadMoses.
HisPeople suppose NewGods; NewGods suppose Gold, Calf, Party.
As soon as learning, forgetting.
When SinaiBottom Received TenWords; SinaiBottom Transmitted TheStones to Pieces.
ThisGod supposes Tent, ManyBitsOfStringAndMetalIsPerfectForMobileHomeOnTheGround.
ThisGod supposes Me, Site, Time.
Me suppose ThisGod supposes Witness, Goodness, MyFather.
3
Witness supposes Presence, Sense.
ThisGod supposes Witness supposes Presence supposes AllSites, AllTimes.
AllSites, AllTimes supposes ThisGod Knows, ThisGod Remembers.
Hegel is right: learn AGod by any name other than its own it calls to you, and you’ll abandon it.
This is where beginning and ending, Being and Not-Being, are Becoming Belief.
Me Belief ThisGod Witness Me twist MyAnkle coming down AMountain.
Me suppose NotMoses, but we both Moses and Me suppose Ankles.
Suppose AllTimes, AllSites: suppose ThisGod Remembers Moses also TwistAnkle?
TwistAnkle supposes Pain, Pain is Unforgettable—Pain supposes Memory.
When Me Received TwistAnkle on AMountain, God Transmitted it to Remembering.
As soon as pain, remembering.
4
AllSites supposes PresenceOnTheGround, WitnessOnTheGround supposes Senses.
Senses suppose Incarnation, Dwelling.
Me suppose NotJesus, but we both have Ankles.
Me suppose ThisGod, suppose AllTimes, suppose Jesus also TwistAnkle coming down?
Exodus
1
As soon as learning, forgetting.
This is where beginning and ending, Being and Not-Being, are Becoming.
Learn a bird by any name other than its own it calls to you, and you’ll forget it.
Bird supposes NotBird; NotBird supposes Bird.
Bird-NotBird supposes Birding, supposes ABird, AnyBird, SomeBird, AllBirds, NoBird.
ABird supposes ThisBird.
ThisBird supposes Me, Site, Time.
Me suppose ThisBird supposes Jazz, Basketball, MyFather.
ThisBird supposes Nest, ThisBitOfStringOnTheGroundIsPerfectForDanglingHomeInTheSky.
ThisBird screams MyNameIsNotOropendula; it is _______________.
ThisBirdName is Unforgettable yet ThisBirdName is Unrepeatable.
2
God supposes NotGod; NotGod supposes God.
God-NotGod supposes Theology, supposes AGod, AnyGod, SomeGod, AllGods, NoGod.
AGod supposes ThisGod; ThisGod is Unforgettable yet ThisGodName is Unrepeatable.
When Moses Received TenWords on AMountain, God Transmitted them to TheStones.
God supposes NotGod; Moses supposes NotMoses; HisPeople suppose NotMoses=DeadMoses.
HisPeople suppose NewGods; NewGods suppose Gold, Calf, Party.
As soon as learning, forgetting.
When SinaiBottom Received TenWords; SinaiBottom Transmitted TheStones to Pieces.
ThisGod supposes Tent, ManyBitsOfStringAndMetalIsPerfectForMobileHomeOnTheGround.
ThisGod supposes Me, Site, Time.
Me suppose ThisGod supposes Witness, Goodness, MyFather.
3
Witness supposes Presence, Sense.
ThisGod supposes Witness supposes Presence supposes AllSites, AllTimes.
AllSites, AllTimes supposes ThisGod Knows, ThisGod Remembers.
Learn AGod by any name other than its own it calls to you, and you’ll abandon it.
ThisGod screams MyNameIs_______. ThisGod supposes Believing.
Me Belief ThisGod Witness Me TwistAnkle coming down AMountain.
TwistAnkle supposes Pain, Pain is Unforgettable—Pain supposes Memory.
When Me Received TwistAnkle on AMountain, God Transmitted it to Remembering.
Me suppose NotMoses, but both Moses and Me suppose Ankles.
Suppose AllTimes, AllSites: suppose ThisGod Remembers Moses also TwistAnkle?
As soon as learning, forgetting. As soon as pain, remembering.
Leviticus

Genesis - essay on first or second birth?
“When I think of inheritance, I’ve never thought much of materials.
|
My family’s always been migratory.
or if not, frequently knocked back down a peg every twenty or so years.
|
My parents didn’t stand much of a chance, economically.
For all their thrift, there wasw always something in the way of their one dream (Macchu Picchu for their anniversary—that was a 15-yr anniversary trip that turned into their 20th, then their 25th. They were both teachers, mom second grade, dad high school bio.
|
So when I think of inheritance, I think more about artifact, memory, than lump sum.
And even those come well-worn.
Corduroy jacket from Papa, Army camping blanket from Grandpa, 3 sets of Hobby Lobby-fabric nightsuits from Grandma, her books and albums. 
Fossil from Peace River from Dad, kitchen stuff from Mom.
|
A similarity among the women in my family, on either side, is scrapbooking (courtesy of the early MLM creative memories. 
Yet even those come perused, amended.
|
The oldest scrapbook we have dates to my great-grandmother, Norma Priebe Schneiss. 
She began compiling in the early 1920s.
|
When I set out to start this piece, I wanted to start at “Who Are We”?
Instead, after picking through the remains of a mishmash centennial scrapbook, a scrap scrapbrook—I begin here: “You fish too?”
Exodus
According to the worldview, it is true.
(I try to enter my parent’s minds, young Bruce and Laura, as they grow up).
The stories they tell me flash – my mother’s first grade teacher, my father’s Church/Mother.
They Tell me = they’ve told me.
= they tell at fundraisers, the same stories, their Salvation-CallToMissions-Marriage-MissionsTrips-Children-PreField “Will You Please Support Us?” over mid-2000s dinner tables, at which no one cusses & no one drinks alcohol & everyone believes.
I witness these things. I am charged with witness, with my witness—how I act speaks to my parents, to my parents’ witness, to my viewers, to the witness of my viewers, to who sees me.
The math and grammar of this is heavy-laden until I cast it off, till I uncarry it.
When I uncarry my witness, I take up poetry, take up witness again. As if there is a stand to take. Wherein I will swear the truth and tell it, as far as I remember, though there are many things I don’t remember that I don’t remember.
In the worldview of my parents of their church of the Baptists of the Christians of the Bible from the mouth of Jesus (twice): “ Go and make Disciples of all nations.”
I learned years later that we don’t all do this in the same way. That the administration of discipleship has many bureaus. My parents come from the Kingdom of Heaven’s Baptist Bureau, Department of Education, as liaisons with the Department of Parks and Recreation. In their team, all also from the Baptist Bureau, there were more, and more have come since:
L&B, Dept. of Foreign Relations A&D, Dept. of Human Resources
M&D, Dept. of Education S&T, Dept. of Engineering
Mom & Dad, Dept. of Education / Parks & Rec.
R&C, Dept. of Parks & Rec. / Education CH, Dept of Human Resources
TW, Dept. of Health P&_R, Dept. of Health
M&J, Dept. of Finance J&B, Dept of Education
AC, Dept. of Human Resources
As many came, many left, and many have come and are coming since. This is called a cloud of witnesses.
Leviticus
“I think deconstruction must happen. Jesus said that even a seed must die so that a tree may grow.
IF you grow up learning the rules you must deconstruct them to live freely. Stopping believing in God is not deconstruction. – You title the same house a different name, and the same gloried shrine, emptied of a big bearded sky-lawyer, sit still, iconless but papered oer with movie posters. Or else it is filled with new books by different bearded men: You still walk with the same old angry rules you live in, the same judgment. You have not unlearned condemnation.
Paint over the stained-glass house in red and it’s still glass. There are seven types of atheism, but only one way to be free—to come undone. To unravel that gordian knot you call philosophy—like a film reel you must cut it, tint it, tape it back together. And of course you cannot do this alone, and the dead will not help you.”
All summer I watched heat trace the scaffolding of thunderheads
Beneath them dynamite and water jet cutters made all the earth a quarry
But as I drove into the storm
there was no enveloping
It was a subduction
and as I pushed deeper under it
& it pushed deeper over me
I heard the tension building as the culverts choked
I saw the wind pick up the hems of the land / roads melted
I smelled the pricking fear as the story of a scorch stuck twice
and then thrice / the trees' and sands' burns like ink on linen
A landscape scriptorium wherein was written a declaration of presence
as my crust melted into a mantle of conviction / my weighted petitions drawn core-ward
My transformer popped and my breakers tripped \ mortared by the might of the blast.
In a room that served as insect-abattoir & ossuary \ my naked startle could not be undone
for I was undone / you had mortared the altar and boundary stone.
poem revised with ten words from Carolyn Forche's opening poem in
In the Lateness of the World
Word Bank ( not part of poem )
culvert
abattoir
ink on linen
weighted petitions
mortared
an ossuary
scaffold
all earth a quarry
scriptorium
altar and boundary stone
When I left to enter town
They said they're on the way
There's no way to reach them
Nicole's nails might be drying
Ale and Gabriel and Hery wait
share
chisme
about old friends
between 2nd grade and 12th,
how different our lives are
Canada, Nicaragua, UPenn, FL
noone around me knows this
out the window of speeding car
I am not surprised at the events
It's like high school all over
parsing through memories
the others might wait at a Café
might be joking about how
everything has changed since
graduation, our last meeting
just in Spanish we all go to uni
i'm the only one at a ‚college'
as the waiter passes me i smell
Nicole's nails are still drying
and I shouldn't have worried
I am at a bar y restaurante
at a table for 6
I ordered hamburgers & water
Don't have a car to meet them
I was dropped off, like a kid
we grew up together, ten years
I forget that time is slippery
language is malleable as well
restaurante smells like open air
strong cologne and cigarettes
after they arrive an hour late,
The fabric of Nica Time
I have no data
after Valerie Wallace
I have no minutes
I have no wifi
when I left to enter town
they said they’re on the way
there’s no way to reach them
Nicole’s nails might be drying
Ale and Gabriel and Hery wait
share chisme about old friends
between 2nd grade and 12th,
how different our lives are
Canada, Nicaragua, UPenn, FL
noone around me knows this
out the window of speeding car
I am not surprised at the events
it’s like high school all over
I sit with five empty stools
parsing through memories
the others might wait at a Café
might be joking about how
everything has changed since
graduation, our last meeting
just in Spanish we all go to uni
i’m the only one at a ‘college’
as the waiter passes me i smell
Nicole’s nails are still drying
and I shouldn’t have worried
I am at a bar y restaurante
at a table for six
I ordered hamburgers & water
don’t have a car to meet them
I was dropped off, like a kid
we grew up together, ten years
I forget that time is slippery
language is malleable as well
restaurante smells like open air
strong cologne and cigarettes
after they arrive an hour late,
I’m glad they aren’t flakes

Basement pipework
beneath the window i sit at every day for class
picture the window i sit at every day for class
the picture window i sit at every day for class
the pictured window i sit beneath today for class
5 - paned window i sit underneath today for class
the pained window, i see underneath, today, fly carcasses
today, i see 3 1 carcasses underneath the pained window
tomorrrow, i see 3 7 carcasses underneath the pained window
every day, i see more fly carcasses beneath the 5 - paned window
every day, i sit for class beneath the picture window
today, i sit for class underneath the picture window
yesterday, i slayed flies during class near the picture window
yes, i slayed the flies at the window, picture the carcasses
picture the carcasses, at the window, of the flies i slayed
pieces of the flies I swatted in the cracks of the window
picture the flies a - buzzing in the cracks of the window
picture the fly swatter at the cracks of the window
picture the flies, swatted, at the cracks of the window
picture the flies at the cracks, the seams, of the window
picture the fly carcasses at the seams of the window
perhaps the carcasses will fly away from the seams of the window
perhaps the carcasses will fall away from the pained window
perhaps the classes will move away from the picture window
perhaps the lessons will move away from the window-picture
the carcasses will not
the talk in four tempos
i.
to be in the open air, with a warm breeze
to rock back and forth in a wicker-seated rocking chair
to sit criss-cross
to have a messenger bag, heavy with physical science textbooks, on my lap
to wear navy blue shorts i’d almost grown out of again
to cling with both hands to the arms of the chair
to hear my heart beating in your ears
to be in a circle with 9 other boys but to not make eye contact with any
to look at the ground, or the ceiling, or across the soccer field at the music hut
to sweat from the heat and the circumstances
to already know about what i was learning
to think it was happening to the other boys differently
to rehearse how i would talk about this later
to wonder when it would be over
to wonder why it was him who was telling us about ourselves and our futures, and not our parents
to adjust myself inside my clothes
to hope no one saw me do it
to hope no one sees me
to run away when it is finally over
ii.
to have cold feet
to be in a dim humid room
to feel the warm, wet air of the floor fan on my bare legs
to kneel on the tile, or in a chair just behind dad
to lean onto the arm of his chair whichever way it was
to watch on the screen of his 10 pound black laptop
to learn together about the warning signs, about a time to tell
to learn to be afraid of a moment alone before i could learn to desire it
to learn it could be anyone i trust who could hurt me
to only remember the coach’s hand on the boy’s leg
to only remember the violet lights of the older boy’s bedroom
to not really talk about it at all after that
iii.
to sit on the gray passenger seat of the patrol
to turn right at the corner in front of the american embassy
to ask as if in an interview instead of as if in a family
to dissasociate from the question of self-pleasure
to preface the question with a story of another boy’s story of another man’s impropriety
to keep our eyes on the road, the both of us
to wish for a clear directive
to be dissatisfied, for once, with a conditional answer
iv.
to bristle with the warmth of summer, of no rain for three months
to wipe the dust off my desk compulsively
to close my eyes and feel the push of air down from the ceiling fan
to lean my chair against the back wall of the classroom
to cringe in advance
to thank god i’m sitting next to kaki and not others
to have friends who know everything
to have secret - sharers to make eye contact with across the room
to daydream and game - plan the day i talk back
to bite my tongue
to feel i am engaging in espionage
to be asked which absurdity i should choose:
to let gay students be leaders or
to prohibit them from advancement at our school
to be spoken about to all as the enemy
to listen to friends say i shoudn’t exist
to be “the corruptor of children”
to wonder if anyone else knows the statistics
to write with a blue gel Pilot G - 2 in big letters
to put secret question marks and exclamation points next to the principal’s claims
to listen to a regurgitated theological meal
to resolve to keep the notes forever
to embolden
THREAD
/7
@pdedgar30
wading through newsletters; so much
account, in my account, wading
1:49 PM Ł Jul 21, 2022 Ł Twitter for InDesign
THREAD
/7
@pdedgar30 Ł Jul 21
Replying to
@pdedgar30
Washington, what news from Washing
-ton! a ton I wanted the light
on, a bright thing 2 watch spiders
with, and brought moths the size of green
and black cicadas; they tore its
web. i can not tear the Web, site
destruction gives its own brightness
i walk in the forest to wash
the Web off, walking into more
primordial webs, have to wash, wipe
-ows, yells and OWs backing up fast,
yellow-knobby-kneed orb weavers
space to back up, stepping room, back
up storage, cloud of web. warehouse,
wear out, worn-outTevas replaced,
replacing, rehoming, new webs
for me, my roommate, orb weavers,
and one day, maybe, a new Web
for all of us. no birds, clocks, no
falls, no leaks, good news, good mornings.
no antigospels, no ritual
cleanings, Web-to-web washing. /END
Toll Road
In America even the vultures have homes
In America the vultures are domesticated
In America the vultures live in cities of their own
In America the vultures have corporate sponsorships
The vultures are still just vultures
They circle the scent you can smell from the highway
They sometimes land on the highways, too
They are casualties to the highway same as the others
America cannot tell vultures from the ospreys and eagles
They have never seen the three in a room together
In America all nests are just nests and all birds are just birds
The vultures do not care about the lack of distinction
They see the death and rot outside and around them, and they reason,
We are well fed, and we are well off, and we have a place that is ours.
All swamps are not made
equal. Ample curb between path and
pit where alligators lurk, not rule.
This is a timid swamp: even
the gnats are delicate, air temperate.
Clouds like a skinned poodle, wisped
by wind into jetstream vertebra, shag
carpet after vacuum: sliding sky just
quick enough to remind you that
the earth rotates under its plastic,
clear shell of loosely packed, combustible
gases. What is it in me
that trades dares with the earth
to collect remnants into soft piles?
Remains of roots, sphere-eroded cobblestone, concrete
tubes, cookie-cut iron, plastic rubble.
Why, under the pressing of vapor,
is it the nature of me
to congeal — microgravity collecting like to
like in piles of like, each
according to their kind — while clouds
themselves are weathered overhead? The same
forces toss the seeds of next
season’s sprouts into dry piles at
the feet of their parents. Corporately-sponsored
nature cannot say to have reclaimed
sites of burrowing and unearthing, burning
or smelting. A swamp not allowed
to eat the curves of pathways
is starved of its own potential,
and its gators stay small, gnats
stay cute, and grass stays clean.
The east-bound wind and west-bound sun
conspire to bring water that will
drown me. The snails stay curled
and the birds remain nested. Spiders
stay small, their fangs docile, meant
to only eat the harmlessest of
multicellular organisms and no-see-ums. Here nature
will not fight you. You may
camp outside—no cold will bury
you like a landslide, no heat
will empty you of life like
a python’s constrictions. The water
has softened the mulch and stones
for your pleasure. Nature, here no
one will accuse you of foulness,
of off-sides strikes at the goal
of our destruction. As for reclamation,
they will say you went about
it “the right way” and hold
you up as exemplar of tandem.
Never mind the park rangers in
their Ford Fusions and the cast-off
bed frames and ovens. You wear
your warm heart in piles next
to the power plant. Is there
no word for the low, ceaseless,
stemless moving of the clouds toward
their end? No metaphor except that
of a fight—the marching, gathering
storm—or of an existence softly
less existing: slipping. The closest I
may reach is current. I make
you verb. The clouds current east,
feathery and not, streaky, wipey, brushstroke,
like rain on the horizon. And,
as I’ve said all this, you’ve
slowly been stealing the air pressure,
’til I can’t fight against unconsciousness.
Nature, to compare you to yourself
is circular reasoning, but what qualm
have you with circles? You gather
in them, your cycles, and undo
yourself in them. What’s the radius
of water? Taffy-puller clouds hint at
spokes, a hand holding the end
of the leash, an anchor. What
God let sparrows fly in volleys
that point north, or bees bullet
toward sweet things? The swelling of
my encounter with you a sign of
something in me that rejects the
very thing that you died to
put inside my bloodstream. I
swell fully, until I am shot
or dosed. What remnants will be
left of me but my traditions?
Of a step in a path,
a tunnel under road, a lock
in the canal of human history
up and down, lake to ocean?
Road to
<<EL DESPERTAR: EL DESPERTAR, EN LA MAÑANA!>> For the last fifteen years, my parents have joked that though they had graduated from a certificate program at a language school in Costa Rica, San José had taught them the wrong Spanish. In our first year in Nicaragua, we lived 40 minutes from my elementary school, and as I slept in the way back of the dusty, gray dusty gray Isuzu Trooper, they listened to broadcast radio to tune their own ears down from the shushing Costa Rican dialect to the yoyo of Nicaraguan Spanish.
this isn’t the essay about Spanish, though. I’ve written about language before, enough for you to be able to zip up that story and this
This is the essay about the Isuzu, the dust like thread that quilts squares to the cotton that grows where I write, like every field crop:
that gathered again and again on the back backing in and out of each square story-lot rice & cane sugar, red bean & rice again after
roads that wound through neighborhoods & field & riverbed & beach & spare rooms (& reminding me of) storms washing out roads.
The Isuzu was long-lived, and it saw us through many, many hours back and forth from the Spanish mission-style house on Highway to Masaya to the missionary school on Old Highway to Leon. Many roads were named this way—to historic cities from the compromise-capital, Managua. One road ruled them all: Pan-American Highway, by which, if I were a real romantic, I could assert ‘all of America is connected.’ Really, it was just the road my neighborhood was on: South Highway, Kilometer 12.7 (and, when we moved across the street, Kilometer 12.9).
Managua, which spans the south shore of Lake Xolotlan, is a rectangular city of 1.4 million, with a low population density because in 1972, a Richter 6.3 earthquake kilometers offshore from the city leveled all but a few buildings higher than three stories tall. The five highways that exit the city do so in its corners: Old Highway to Leon and South Highway the southwest, New Highway to Leon the northwest, Highway to Masaya the southeast, and Pan-American Highway the northeast. At the widest, they’re five lanes. So, in the beginning, every drive was a long one.
When we moved to Nicaragua, we moved in with my parents’ colleagues Bev and Larry, on Highway to Masaya. The Smiths, Robinsons, Henzlers, and Larges were four missionary families already there when ABWE, their uniting missions agency, purchased a 160-acre trapezoid of undeveloped land on New Highway to Leon. My dad, once we arrived, became its scheduling, accounting, and maintenance director, and drove 40 minutes there and back through Managua’s winding city streets. On Sundays, we attended church past it in Nagarote, an hour drive.
I tell you so that you might understand why I remember sleeping and reading in the Isuzu more than I remember riding in it. Until age 15, I climbed right over the back seats without putting them down into the more quiet WayBack. I blew through the books that arrived in mailers from my grandmother in the US: Harry Potter, Eragon, and other paperback book series that took two to three weeks to get to the P.O. Box in the heart of the city. At church in Nagarote, we laid out furniture blankets, which folded in the back made for a huge, dusty pillow.
The land ABWE bought went by a few names—officially, it was Centro ABEM, but we called it the Center, because much of our life revolved around it. Many things grew out of the land: neem trees with hard wood, green spindles, and jagged leaves, a seminary building. Across most of the Center grew a long, sharp grass that was baled, and later sorghum, which was sold to TipTop, a national fried chicken chain for animal feed. Every few years, fire consumed them, accidents of the settlements on either side of the land or of a child playing with fire on property.
When you entered the Center off well-paved New Road to Leon, it was on cobblestone, large octagons of concrete that dropped abruptly onto a dirt road that billowed behind you up past a maintenance shed towards the main campground. It’s the road I learned to drive stick on.
At the top of the hill, cars had to step back up onto the concrete cobblestone, a parking lot very rarely used, stones grown in with hardy grass.
All of it was hard: the heat, the ground, the volcanic pumice stone under the soil, the work my father did to keep it going, the daily drive.
It is unique to nowhere that roads be hard, that they wash out after rainstorms, that they crack under use, that time reclaims them. The Center has one such reclaimed road—a gully, 6 feet wide, shaded by ancient chilamate trees, that was once a drover’s road. It runs in back, still a divot, still a ditch, but little more than a gully. Desire paths criss-crossed grasses across the campground, usually between the dining hall and sports fields—and everywhere else. Those in my back yard reached the lime, the basil, the avocado, my father’s orchids: such is the way of things.
It is unique to nowhere as well that the cars in a place say plenty about their owners. The missionaries I knew drove mostly second-hand cars that missionaries before them drove—in high-school, I drove a third-hand Jeep Cherokee, one of the only automatic transmission cars I knew of among my friends. Its previous owners, the Keelings, had shipped it from the US when they moved, to my benefit, because though my parents had taught me to drive stickshift, they didn’t trust the roads enough to let me drive their cars there: one fewer foci in automatic.
When the protests began, the roads were full of protestors. They lined themselves with them. Seas of blue and white, the national colors, cross-country. Old and young united, in 2018, against higher taxes with fewer benefits. United as mothers against their children’s disappearers.
When the paramilitary groups began to respond, they mostly drove the same truck: a Toyota Hilux. They were the informal troop carrier, the official car of the paramilitary police. They patrolled neighborhoods, with or without armed men in the beds of the grey and silver trucks.
There were missionaries who drove Hiluxes. It damaged their witness, their ability to establish or maintain relationships with everyday people. The Hilux had become a symbol of terror, where it had once only been a representation of some sort of financial privilege—maybe a strong business, maybe strong support, maybe good work—now it connoted connection to a government determined to stamp and quell and silence.
When the day of the national strike occurred, the streets, usually full of vendors, oxcarts, mototaxis, pedestrians and vehicles, were empty.
There had been protests before. Especially around every election, Americans kept to themselves, either at home or driving to beach.
Upon outbreaks, or safety ratings changes, we would get an email from the U. S. government letting us know. When I was a Boy Scout,
I met the first ambassador these came from, but embassy warning about the risk of chikungunya or zika was usually old news. Pastoral
networks are quite strong, and we’d hear of unrest in certain areas of town: not officially but by the pastors my dad worked with.
near the government district, down
-town, to stay away. Americans are
legally prohibited from participating
In 2018 many Nicaraguan demographics joined in political demonstrations, because the Sandinista-led government slashed social security
benefits but raised the tax rates. Given some of the history surrounding American intervention, the missionary school shut down. It was
not going to bus students across town to avoid involvement in Nicaraguan conflicts. The school continued online, and my sister almost
didn’t graduate in-person, but it worked out. The danger, the risk, was of guilt by false hope: the banquet was booked across town too.
association, but the protests were
hardly ever anti-US.
I called them conflicts, but what it really was was that they ripped up the cobblestone roads, stacking up adoquin in piles to hide behind since the students with nothing but fireworks and mortars faced
police and paramilitaries who all had AK-47s realizing the odds were never even, even during “talks.”
The intersections across town are stationed with artisans.
On many corners, windshield washers, persistent even if
one’s windshield had been washed at the previous corner,
even when my dad wagged his finger ‘no.’ Anything for 25¢
in form of one 5 Cordoba coin, which depreciated in value.
On another corner might have been cashew vendors, roasted nuts stacked,
several children, juggling some balls, stacked on their shoulders for clarity.
or else juggling fruits, or selling them, running between a grill and the cars
or little folded palm fronds, or trinkets with ears of roasted corn, or tortillas.
On many streetsides were whole -ias: pupuserias, panaderias, quesillerias,
—the -ies of each stovecooked food. lines making an obstructive third lane.
My parents believed that the children at the semaforos had
handlers of some kind that collected their tips, so they put
together goodie bags of things only kids would benefit from:
cookies, crackers, wrapped in cellophane with a gospel tract.
There were many parts of my life in Nicaragua where sound roared, engulfing. The moments it rained so hard on our zinc rooftop that a TV with its volume turned to 100 was inaudible. The roar of the Pacific Ocean blasting into volcanic rock. The volume of the subwoofers at Baptist and Pentecostal churches, who believed that the whole neighborhood ought to be able to hear when church was beginning to worship. The most frequent was when either of my parents’ cars drove any faster than 15 miles per hour over a plain, rocky, dusty, dirt road.
Our favorite places were reached by dirt: the beach, networked with dirt roads between secluded coves with either no development at all or an entire housing complex. The maroon pumice gravel road tracing up from the end of the pavement up to the top of Volcan Masaya, and the wet mud layer on top of quarried rock in the two furrows climbing through cloud forest up to Selva Negra, the mountain cabin resort. During the rainy season, cobble road runoff divots had reverse speed bumps, sometimes one big dip where the river washed right through.
What I see few of in the US is the microbus—the 22-seater with five or six aisles and fold-out aisleseats. They’re so much smaller than American charter busses, because they have no undercarriage for luggage—they just take people, and a little stuff stacked between the back seat and the back hatch. My friend Nicole’s dad ran a driving company our school contracted to bus students across town in the morning and on field trip days. They had curtains, leather upholstery, dirty floors, no AC, and tall windows, open to the smog and sounds of traffic.
The micro bus is not to be confused with the bigger types of school buses, with the mototaxis or bicytaxis
with a white 14-seater passenger van public transport donated by Russia/US sharing the road with oxcarts
fitting few people but much luggage people squeezed in until wheels scrape hanging off the side and back
grinding uphill in first gear, glancing the top of the wheelhouse, barely safe of the median, curb & sidewalk
The experience of full microbuses (and, maybe, of Nicaragua in general) is always loud, always close, always a little bit sweaty. A 100-pound high-schooler, I usually sat in a slanted aisleseat, hinges bent by past weight. It was away from the window—the benefit of airflow risked diesel exhaust if stuck behind the wrong truck. A woman’s sunglasses were snatched off her forehead by a hand thrust through the window, or a palmfrond souvenir tossed in. An overcrowded microbus hit my neighborhood wall once. Blood dripped out of the shattered back.
Well, of course I’m thinking about space again--
and of the sauteed steak and peppers and an egg
with a runny yolk, drizzled over a conversation
that’s as splintered as our many origins. I learned
that card suits are regional, spade traded for gold.
I learned the Eucharist is a cuss word. Italian,
French, Austrian dialects of German, and being
better fed than most of the exchange students.
Her daily matcha, and her bird,
perched in the hallways between
the cavern with the high-up sky
and the water heater’s pilot light,
and the long hallway that led
from the formal sitting room way
down to more lived-in TV room.
First bathroom I had a real skincare
routine in. First tried an
oatmeal Lush-brand shampoo,
realized how loud I was playing
Nicki, Janelle, Tierra & John,
three synoptic gospels & an odd
man out, as always--I read four
Bible books at a time, read the
poets in their original language.
The tail of the reverse-L, outwards from the locked door in
my beat-up knock-off Chucks, white but grimed with city.
The soles sore, miles to work and back and out and back,
not realizing the faux-pas of expecting to work all day long.
The boyzzz (and, sometimes, a television room for Stella,
the girls). High schoolers, a bookshelf curtained off,
school groups and tourists a patterned cushioned couch
for whom language school in exchange, a steady income
was an excuse to live on the non-bed a non-issue when
Mediterranean all summer. the soaps and the news play
I translated through broken back-to-back-to-back with
English to broken Spanish. the weather, always hot until
The last day, it finally poured.
On the balcony, I met Martin,
magazines, Merton, and God.
A man, a bat, a bag, the bugs, a bat. Amen.
Our new house had no front wall or gate, but it was a different kind of safe. It was called a “Colony” on a circle with a forest in the middle that we called The Middle. Our neighbor, for whom the Middle was just a mulch pile, still got robbed at gunpoint—then they put in the guard and two boom barriers.
I wonder what emma remembers, what her first memories are .
My grandparent’s don’t remember history the way it was taught to me
We did not live in the shadow of the volcano. A long time ago, someone did, and they were buried there.
A few years ago, Momotombo grew a shadow of its own, a shadow independent of the sun.
The Masaya volcano did it before – Masaya, meaning “place where deer are” or “Mountain that burns,” not Messiah, not “further still” (Mas allá).
And Mombacho before it, casting a shadow of its own shoulder-flesh into Lake Cocibolca.
Green grows in these shadows, even after they smoke and burn.
In the beginning, every drive was a long one.
When they were, they came for the U.S. Embassy, not for Americans. The missionaries knew an Embassy security officer from church and got a briefing.
My friend Natalie shattered her front teeth roller-skating on her tile front porch.
“Do you think it’s possible to change someone’s beliefs about something? Frankly, I think it’s impossible,” my manager tells me. She’s just had a chat with Mark, the man-Catholic on staff at the coffee shop we all barista at. She’s 21, a pastor’s kid, and has left God behind since the church hurt her and her friends. She had a therapist, and doesn’t now. I don’t blame her for asking questions, as she has many times. She often asks me why I would chose to identify with a religion that’s done so much harm, which she asks with the same righteousness as the question she’s asking now, as though it’s meant to persuade me to stop, that I’m wrong.
I’ve found a botanical encyclopedia of Nicaragua in the repository of the Universidad Nacional Agraria
What’s the use of talking about the crime in Nicaragua, as a white American who lived there? Some things are bound to happen, and to plenty of people.
It’s 2012, and I’m on a curb in Managua. It’s field trip day, and I’m in my pants era. It’s maybe 7th Grade. I’m next to Maggie, sitting next to samuel maybe, or kelsey. the field trip we went to was the Rolter factory, where they make flip flops out of rubber. They vulcanize it and stamp it out in patterns, melting the trim back down into a liquid to pour it again. We might have just been to the Pepsi factory, too, which is across the street. We got commemorative pre-expanded bottles -- hard plastic that hasn’t been filled and shaped with hot air into the shape that would be filled with pepsi, sprite, or powerade.
I’m scrawnnnny, and I’m in the black Airwalk skate shoes that I wore all through high school, from the Payless shoe store. My feet were too wide for a lot of other shoes, because I walked barefoot everywhere. My hair is long along my face, too long, touching my shoulders and hanging over my ears and into my eyes. I used to smell it, hold onto it like a stim, and wouldn’t let it get cut. it was too precious to me, and the fear of getting a buzz cut too strong.
I can’t tell who’s standing over Maggie.
Bible Camp. It’s a simple premise: summer camp, but Christian. For the first two decades of my life, it was easy to see the one I went to, Camp Gilead, as nothing but that. A camp that used to be a golf course on a lake that used to be higher (that spent an hour in the early morning, and hour midmorning, an hour and a half in the evening, and an hour in the night doing something Biblical). “How to have summer camp in a God-honoring way.” The longer you’re in a community of people that identify as Christians, though, the harder it is to keep the field of view, the camera lens, zoomed in to say “just camp with Bible stuff.”
Because as much as Christians like to say we all believe the same things, we all believe in Jesus, there are people who will grip the edges of the frame and zoom things into the micro-level, to show you just how different people are, to remind you not all Christians are created equal, not born again the same—in fact, they suggest, they might not be born again at all.[1] Because as much as Christians like to say we all believe the same things, we all believe in Jesus, there’s God gripping the edges of the frame and zooming things out to the macro-level, to show you just how unusual and irregular this institution is from anywhere else.

[1] The History of Christian Doctrines. (1) Presuming Jesus dies and resurrects and ascends into heaven, (2) the early church spreads from the Middle East westward towards Rome and Spain, southward into Ethiopia, eastward into India, and north into Eastern Europe. None of these places are called this at the time, of course. (3) A big group of Christian leaders, realizing that Jesus isn’t coming back in the lifetimes of the first apostles, even the first few generations of Christians, institutionalize the New Testament and church leadership and what makes heresy heresy. (4) The church splits along several ideological, sometimes political, lines—over texts, over leadership, over heresies—over the use of images in worship, over whether to cloister or conquer, or over whether one should pay the church to relieve the time one must spend in penance for sin. I have just generalized 1500 years. (5) With every new major split, there are a hundred minor splits along traditional, textual, and worshipful lines, affecting the course of every academic, ethnic, racial, and political community. Institutional Christianity is not immune from the sins of the world around it—in fact, one of the prerequisites for becoming a Christian is being a sinner. (6) As American Protestantism develops an Independent Spirit, rather than a Holy one, academic schisms over Modernism et al. in the North and Southern congregationalism, which says anyone can be a pastor if they’re a Christian, corporatize the faith: churches get presidents, boards, CFOs, and social media marketing teams. Accountability erodes. (7) A plurality of Conservative American White Christian Evangelicals, most of whom grew up ignorant of points (2), (3), (4), (5), and (6) because their churches and schools do not teach them, the first consensus of . Some with a bit more awareness but distrust institutional education exist in a Dunning-Kruger echo-chamber.
Many of the verb forms in Jesus’ exhortations here, in this portion of the Sermon on the Mount (“ask, and it will be given to you,” “seek, and you will find”), are transitive verbs (verbs that usually have objects attached to them) made into intransitive verbs, standing on their own. Seek what ? Find what ? Ask for what ?
There’s an opportunity to experience the kind of openness of this verbiage, if only we would align the posture of our hearts with it. It’s a new kind of openness for us, but one intrinsic to the heart of Jesus: What would change in us if we felt free to search widely, instead of searching for the little things we think we want?
Jesus doesn’t guarantee in this sermon that we’ll find that little thing – but he does promise we can trust in the goodness of God to deliver what is good to us when we do seek, ask, and knock.
At the end of the passage, Jesus pivots thematically, from ‘generosity received from God’ to ‘generosity we ought to extend.’ In that classic rule, “Treat people the same way you want them to treat you,” we’re told to meet the needs of others with the same conviction and creativity that we meet our own needs. It should be instinctual as getting up in the morning and feeding ourselves.
It’s in the relationships we build with those we help (which is a step further than assistance) that we experience a renewed taste of the love we receive from God in Jesus—God’s heart is so unselfish that God has no desire but to give!
In the parable of the unforgiving servant, Jesus does what he does best in providing a firm comparison between two modes of approaching interpersonal debt.
Sometimes Jesus ends a parable and it takes his disciples asking him what they meant to be explained. (The secret of the Kingdom of God, a mentor told me once, is asking. Remember March 2?) Here, Jesus makes his point clear: if we can’t forgive our heavenly siblings from our heart, our choice will crush us.
The word ‘parable’ is in the same family as the math word ‘parabola’: a U-shaped, symmetrical curve. As a college student, I often hoped that the quizzes I took would be graded on a curve—that somehow, what I earned might be played off as better than it actually was. This is what both debtors hope too—that they might be treated better by their debtors than what they owe.
The gift of the Holy Spirit is in conviction and advocacy – of accountability and assurance. There’s nothing we can do to earn God’s love, but if we ask God is ready to give grace in abundance. Such holy freedom comes with a responsibility, as Paul says, “For what I received I passed onto you.” Such is our duty with our grace, with our love, with our hope.
A majorly bold claim precedes the reading for today—Jesus has just said, “I and the Father are One.” That claim is at the heart of what it means to be a Christian: that we can claim proximity to, and unity with, our Creator. In other contemporary religions, this claim would not seem so consequential: the Greeks and Romans had their gods and demigods, and the Eastern spiritualities were polytheistic. But to the Jewish leaders, this was blasphemy—and illustrates once more how distinct the person of Jesus is.
Jesus knows he’s right, but he doesn’t make this claim without backup—this text gives us three signs (a core theme of the John’s gospel) to prove it. The first is his work, which is undeniably good. He’d been all around the region healing, restoring, raising up, and revealing God’s abundance to the people, all of which he attributes to the Father. Not only do we learn about Jesus from his teaching, but we know his Heart from his works.
When they admit his works to be true, the Jewish leaders return his claim: “You, being a man, make yourself God.” Jesus answers with Scripture, to rebut their claims, recalling Psalm 82:6, a powerful call-to-action from judge-God presiding over the congregation:
“Vindicate the weak and fatherless;
Do justice to the afflicted and destitute.
Rescue the weak and needy;
Deliver them out of the hand of the wicked.
They do not know nor do they understand;
They walk about in darkness;
All the foundations of the earth are shaken.
I said, ‘you are gods,
And all of you are sons of the Most High.”
The third exhibit in this passage is an expert witness—John the Baptist. One of the first evangelists of Jesus’ coming, John’s testimony stands in mind as a righteous figure whose memory (he may have been killed already by Herod at this point) looms. For what John said (and they admit “everything he said… was true”), he proclaimed about Jesus.
Jesus’ testimony in his community is triple-reinforced by his words, his deeds, and what others say about him. Can the same be said for you? When God claims closeness with us, to claim it back is a matter of huge responsibility. But to live according to this closeness is transformingly radical, and it’s what the world needs—to claim God’s closeness saves us.
Legal document + facebook post?
my parents newsletters ++++ something else? report card?
Out of the Snake Pit and Into the Fire
Day 1: 5:00-6:00 P.M.
Southeastern University has a kinly history to Florida Southern. 
Both institutions were started in the South and changed names and locations several times before settling in Lakeland, but FSC got here first. 
Southeastern has traveled farther, having been born in Alabama and raised in Georgia. 
Though neither college directly interacts with the other, rumors float around that foster rivalry: that an SEU pastor dissed Florida Southern, or that the negative tone of the Lakeland Ledger’s articles is due to the number of Southeastern students who work there.
I park in the very back.
I’m startled by how tall the buildings are: “Buena Vista,” which is divided into East and West; each is five stories high.
At Florida Southern, the most floors a building has are three (two and a basement.) The buildings at SEU are modern.
They are tortoises, light and dark brown shells for the departments inside.
The edifices are marked by small, all-caps, thin serif font labels, as if declaring, softly, each of their names.
Many Lakelanders think of Southeastern as a hipster breeding ground, so I dress accordingly.
When I arrive, I’m out of place.
My denim jacket over black jeans and chelsea boots are an outlier: most men are wearing blue jeans and short-sleeve button-downs over white tees or athleisure.
They don’t wear socks; ankles must be in again.
The women wear the same outfits, just replace the button-downs with light cardigans.
Portico, the coffeeshop I sit in, explores the consequences of attempting a vintage aesthetic with a Hobby-Lobby catalog.
Flimsy furniture serves as the counter for sugar and cream, and identical maps of the Delmarva Peninsula are stacked on the wall above me.
A nook, under the staircase leading to the balcony where most of the seating is, is dark, but several women sit there on their computers, now on their phones.
I sit in an armchair on a raised floor that undoubtedly doubles as a stage—no one bothered to stow the monitors, speakers, and subwoofers to either side, or the large storage trunk hiding the mixer.
The only decor is a lantern, but instead of a light bulb or candle a fake succulent is trapped inside.
Portico plays music through speakers in the ceiling, not the ones on the ground.
The music is pop, the kind of playlist that might go viral on Twitter as “Songs that Never Fail to Make White People Beyond Turnt.” I’m not generalizing when I say that Portico’s patrons have sung or tapped along to each song loudly.
Among the mix: “Take on Me,” “Can’t Stop the Feeling,” “Shut up and Dance,” “Video Killed the Radio Star.”
I realize 35 minutes into my observational visit to SEU that though I want to remain unnoticed, I forgot to take my Florida Southern sticker off of my computer.
It is small, so I remove it and relocate it to the bottom of my laptop, but then I realize that I have a second, much larger, sticker of Annie Pfeiffer chapel on it that says “HOME” right on the front.
I choose to believe that no one connects the dots.
Portico connects to the campus bookstore.
It closes at five, right when I get there.
Most of Portico’s patrons are gone by 6.
Day 2: 10:00-11:00 A.M.
Southeastern is in the middle of an odd part of town, Lakeland-wise.
Whereas FSC came to Lake Hollingsworth, to cheap land, because the city hadn’t reached out that far yet—the two institutions are the same age—SEU got here later: “cheap land” meant “low-income neighborhood.” Southeastern’s east border, when not a lake, is Bonny Shores Mobile Home Park.
The development to the north is Arizona Mobile Home Park.
Property values around SEU aren’t as low as between I-4 and US-92, but SEU is literally “on the other side of the tracks”: the railroad that runs between Tampa and Orlando cuts it off from the rest of Lakeland.
Parking at SEU is just as hard to find as it is at any college during the morning, and I spend my first ten minutes on campus looking for a place to rest my car before I stroll campus.
By strolling, I mean walk half a mile and find that the place I was going to eat breakfast is actually “swipe-access only.” I would have to stalk a student to get in, and I don’t have the guts.
I walk instead to the Chick-fil-A Express underneath the student union.
Here, students wear a ton of SEU-promoting “Fire gear.” The nursing students wear red polos with a “Southeastern Nursing” logo on them, and others wear t-shirts that say just “Fire.” SEU tour guides wear red tops and dark bottoms, just like FSC’s Southern Ambassadors.
Several tours walked through the dining area, some with large numbers of prospective students and their parents and one with only two.
The guides have microphones around their ears connected to a speaker on their belt loop so that the guests can hear them.
One of the parents taking a tour stops a young woman to ask her a question I don’t catch.
“I don’t know, I don’t go here,” she says, and walks out of the dining area.
The students are diverse: not only is there a visible presence of students of color—the manager of the Chick-fil-A express speaks Spanish comfortably to the cashier, using Latin American slang like “mae,” which means, loosely, “bro”—but there’s also a strong number of students who are visibly disabled.
FSC is known for its inaccessibility to students in wheelchairs because of its listing as a historic district (which means it can’t build ramps in Wright’s buildings), but at SEU there’s no problem.
Day 3: 5:00-6:00 P.M.
“I love you.
I love you,” a student says, hugging a girl standing between him and his study partner, also hugging her.
The first is wearing a flannel and skinny jeans with chelsea boots, the second athletic shorts and a zip-collar pullover.
They both have short beards, Macintosh computers, and hot coffees.
It is warm in Portico, but Florida-cold outside.
I have just come off-tour at Florida Southern—a spring break employment choice that enables me to spend tens of dollars on coffee and Chick-fil-A at Southeastern.
I forgot, until I was walking through the heart of SEU, to take off my ambassador uniform name tag and Cornerstone hat.
The first group I walked by was taking the same kind of staged, “candid” group photo that banners class Facebook pages and pamphlets that the Florida Southern admissions department creates.
The chairs upstairs in Portico are loud; they screech as the co-huggers rise and leave.
When they arrive at the staircase, “stop,” one says.
They’re practicing lines.
They do, though, because Plaid Flannel needs to introduce Zip-Collar to a young woman coming up the stairs.
“Hey girl,” the young woman’s friend, waiting one table away from my armchair, says.
They hug.
Students at Southeastern are affectionate.
When you walk past them, expect eye contact and smiles.
If you know one, expect the physical distance between you to close to zero.
An older blond woman in black walks along the balcony, spraying cleaner on her white rag and wiping down the tables, the stools, the bar.
She arranges the business cards piled on the coffee table in front of me.
The chests of athletes here advertise Adidas, like Florida Southern’s do.
Another company in common: Coca-Cola.
Both schools have lucrative contracts with the company.
“It’s fierce,” a man downstairs says.
I assume he’s talking about his friend’s outfit: “Sadies,” the Sadie Hawkins dance at SEU is tomorrow; I wouldn’t get away with crashing it.
Day 4: 8:00-9:00 P.M.
Finding parking at Southeastern at night is harder than in the day.
Several gates close at sundown so that all of the traffic is diverted into one gate and even then many of the parking spots on campus are protected by white signs denoting their reserved status: saved for the dean of so-and-so department, saved for the president.
Over fifteen parking spots just have curbs that say “D E A N” on them.
The parking spots “reserved for visitors” are full.
I drive back to the entrance and park outside the guard station and wait for an officer to emerge.
One does, and I ask him where I can go.
“Just go over to staff parking and park there,” he says.
I do, and I begin my walk towards Portico.
The campus is dark, and the loud jazz still plays outside, and I see only a young man and a young woman (the former lifts his hoodie to show his stomach to the latter) and a man on a skateboard coasting past me.
I reach the front door of Portico, and it is locked—it is only 8 P.M..
The barista mouths to me that they’re closed, but that I can get to the balcony from the student union behind it.
I walk around to the side of the building, enter the student union, and climb the stairs to a bland hallway leading to the back entrance of the coffee-shop.
I sit down in another armchair, across from a young man with an iPad mini and a hat on backwards that is embroidered with the words “God Is Love” above the strap.
As I begin writing down my walk, he lets out two deep sighs and sinks back into his chair, tilts his head, and sleeps.
He wakes up once, stares at the notebook on his knee, and falls back asleep.
Then he wakes up again.
He rubs his eyes; they and the skin around them are red and flushed.
His skateboard is propped on the coffee table in front of him.
I’m sure he could get home quickly but he continues to sit and doze, in and out of consciousness.
In a moment of determined awakeness, he flips forward his hat—it has embroidery on the front as well, with the letters G-O-D compressed into the frame of a heart.
I introduce myself.
At first, he is reluctant to say much more than “I like it”—SEU—or “It’s cool.”
He went to Sadie’s, with friends, not taken by anyone but himself.
He said that there was lots of dancing, that he took a lot of pictures, food, snacks, that “there was a big area to dance (he motions a large flat oval with his hands) but it was all upbeat—there was no slow-dancing.” It was more “jump around” music, he says.
Riley is a Marketing major at Southeastern, and he really likes his professor: there’s only one marketing teacher there, the “Dean of the Markets,” which explains the parking situation.
He says that there are anywhere from twenty to fifty students in each class that he takes.
I’m surprised, considering that SEU’s on-campus enrollment is 3000—its commuter and online students raise that total to almost 10000.
He tells me that he has to leave soon.
I ask if he’s going home, and he says no: he’s going to chapel, which SEU students are required to attend three times a semester.
Florida Southern requires that all of the students above my year go to a convocation three times a year, but its most religious aspect is the invocation at the beginning.
I ask, if Riley doesn’t mind, about his religion.
He tells me that he transferred to Southeastern from another Christian college, one in Ohio, and that he likes it better here.
“I wasn’t raised in a Christian home, but I got saved like four or five years ago,” he says, “Here I’ve had powerful encounters with the Holy Spirit—they’re pretty open to letting God work in you.” He takes his feet of the coffee table and swings his backpack from the floor next to him onto his back as he picks up his skateboard.
Before he leaves, I ask whether he ever comes to Florida Southern.
“I would stop by,” he says, “I like it, it’s a cool—it’s got a university feel to it.
It’s accessible.” When I get to my car, a small, folded business card advertising a new ministry is stuck in the window.
Day 5: 7:45 - 8:45
I enter Portico and choose a seat at the bar overlooking the floor of the coffeeshop.
It squeaks loudly with every shift of my weight or cross of my leg.
I decide to move, right at eight when Portico closes.
More patrons enter and sit on the balcony.
Two sit next to one another on a black leather couch.
They have dark, curly hair and space gray laptops.
His is bare except for the logo, ASUS, but hers is sheeted with overlapping stickers—logos like “Elevate” and “saved by grace.”
He rests his head on her shoulder.
They laugh at each other, and then again when four students, sitting at a long dining table, discuss rapping and finding a record label that would take their work.
“They need to be doing something constructive with their energy,” No-Stickers says.
“If all they do is…” Stickers speaks softly.
“...they won’t have time to write papers and they’ll get tired… get kicked out.” After their quiet exchange, their conversation turns back to homework.
A few minutes later, he puts an earbud in her ear and she begins nodding her head as he taps his foot on the leg of the coffee table in front of them.
They stop after a moment, and then he begins drumming with his hands on the tabletop.
She stands.
“Where are you going?” “To the bathroom,” she says.
“No.” He holds her hand as she begins to walk away, only letting go when the distance between them exceeds their outstretched arms.
She returns, and soon No-Stickers rises, this time without fanfare.
When he gets back from the restroom, they both leave.
A young woman in a red Southeastern sweatshirt and black leggings who has been on the phone since I came in moves to take their place on the leather couch.
“I love you too, May May.
Bye.” She turns to her companion, a young man in a Bulls soccer tee.
“She never calls this late at night; I had to answer.
Show me that video again: I was talking to my grandma and you were trying to distract me.” They share earbuds and he leans into her, putting his shoulder behind her back as they turn to face the screen of her Mac that sits on the coffee table.
They whisper softly to one another, she hits him, leans onto him, and pulls the computer closer.
Immersion Reflection
When I first started doing research for the immersion project, I meant to do a deep analysis of the histories of the two colleges, drawing parallels between the developments each has made over the course of their lives.
It would have drawn from the surroundings and the oldness of certain buildings, but also I would have made substantial use of newspaper sources like the Orlando Sentinel and the Tampa Bay Times.
What I think worked in my essay, when final revisions took place, was that I pared down an essay bogged by facts and let perception, still informed by reality, breath more.
The immersion itself was not uncomfortable for me.
The only sickening moment I experienced was when I realized that I had left my hat on a chair in Portico on day 3.
A section I removed for the sake of length had to do with the loss of my hat and my search for it: on Day 4, I asked the custodial worker and the barista where I might find it.
The custodian said the lost and found, but the barista said, “someone could have stolen it… it’s just a hat anyway, right?” It was less compassionate than I give him credit for.
A conversation I wish I could have had at SEU was with a homeless man who drove an adult tricycle around campus.
He was a little older, very short, wore plenty of Fire gear, and, it seems, personable.
I would have liked to know his story.
The hardest part of this paper, for me, was the selection of specific experiences or moments throughout my time in those places.
I wanted to write a long piece, one that would touch deeper on each of the issues that we talked about.
What I didn’t know was that there would be so many topics to discuss, and such little space to do it.
Instead of focusing deeply on poverty, sexual abuse, relationships, and sacrifice.
I came in thinking that I would tell the story like the speaker who goes to Cuba in “Green is the New Red,” who sees both sides of comparison and, still being from one of the two options, goes home and writes about it generally unharmed (except for some bruises and cracked ribs).
Instead, I felt that throughout I was more like the speaker in “No Wonder They Call Me A Bitch,” whoa is more straightforward in its approach to dealing with complex subjects.
Over the course of my investigation , I garnered a new appreciation for the students at SEU who work half- or full-time, because is seems so hecttic and annyoing to serve a whole line of people you’ve never met or who are just as demanding and rude as any other party visitng a food establishment might be.
PD :: A place I went where no one new me – public vs.
private self
Showing up in Spain.
A couple names, a couple addresses, no chaperones, no friends
Host mother, internship supervisor, new intern friends
Who I was publicly – didn’t go to church my whole time there
summer camp chaperone, easygoing, American
went to pride there for the first time and hid all trace of it
way too eager to work than was culturally normal
good at card games, sarcastic, cheesy, really interested in learning
self-possessed, well-dressed, independent, flighty
spent money freely
artistic, loving, personable, spoke the ‘wrong’ Spanish
Who I was privately – was reading my Bible more on my own time than before
was reading other books for pleasure and learning – MLKJr, Lorca
explorative but not in any risky ways other than drinking at the festivals
AND taking a trip to madrid with really kind of only one contact
yearning, many crushes,
content to be in a situation where I didn’t have anything/ know anything other than how to communicate with people
really fit – exercising so much
listening to the most sensual music and the most spiritual at the same time
What major/ancient narratives can connect to this experience?
I thought about writing that this wasn’t a prodigal son experience.
Sept.
14, 2024
I must learn to write through tears that are welling in me as I set myself toward the page.
My brow, furrowing on its own, my jaw, quivering, my left eye swells with a sense that what I might say has the chance to change things I don’t even know exist.
I first began wondering about the emergence of Creative nonfiction in response to hypertext and multimedia when reading Jay David Bolter’s Writing Space.
When did deconstructive nonfiction emerge? What are these terms?
One of the first examples of creative nonfiction I was ever exposed to, as a theoretical text rather than as an example of craft, was Gloria Anzaldua’s Borderlands: La Frontera.
I knew, when I was going to write my undergraduate thesis four years later, that a book of mine ought to do something like that: say the things, reflect on the things, and express the things across lineated and prose writing.
There ought to be many voices other than my own— it would reflect my experience of thought, even though my experience of memory is very opposite.
My experience of thought is networked, webbed, like the spiders behind my apartment.
This very morning, as the first fog of fall lifted from the humid Florida sprawl called Orlando, I walked my dog out and noticed the chain link fence was spotted with spider webs filling in every few rhombi.
It was such:
/ \ / \ / \ /🕸️\ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \
\ / \ / \🕸️/ \ / \ / \🕸️/ \ /🕸️\ / \ / \ / \ / \ /
/ \ /🕸️\ / \ / \ / \ / \🕸️/ \ / \ /🕸️\ / \ / \ / \
\ / \ / \ / \🕸️/ \ / \ / \ / \ /🕸️\ / \ / \ / \ /
/ \ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \
\ / \ / \🕸️/🕸️\ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \🕸️/ \ /
/ \ / \ / \ / \ / \🕸️/ \ / \ /🕸️\ / \ / \ / \ / \
When I think of things, reach a node and make an association, moving to and for.
These comparisons are intrinsic to our digital rhetorics: the world wide web, the neural networks, the “did you mean? feature”, Search Engine Optimization, crawlers: all metaphors for my thought—information access.
Mary Leader writes in The Distaff Side: “I use ASCII and windings in my poems because Women have been decorating their handiwork this way for centuries.”
Compared to my thought processes, my memories are lonely, quiet, imagistic.
It is as a photo album, a scrapbook, a memory box: I remember very few words of anyone I’ve ever learned.
What I remember are the silences, the touch, the face, the place.
I see my ownself in flashback, I don’t remember my own words.
Some of my friends and most vividly my sister, have a knack for, or at least put a great deal of trust in their verbatim memory.
My body responds to writing this with a well of sadness again, as though there is something said that the locked door serves.
Words I don’t remember verbatim I remember in concept, in reception.
I recall what I am told.
I recall that I am to be a way, to do something or not.
Binaries—positive commands, negative commands.
Ones and Negative Ones.
For as long as I have been alive, I have been trying to be good.
The words I remember best are the words that have been rehearsed.
The most concrete nodes are narratives I distrust.
The script of the campus tour the college I went to where I was a tour guide, an “ambassador.” The stories my parents told when they were fundraising for international missions: how they fell in love, that our job was to be “a witness.”
The way I told people about my childhood as a missionary kid started with some semantic fudging.
I was pretty clear with folks in college that I grew up in Nicaragua, but I was afraid to use the word ‘missionary’.
I called them non-profit, community development workers, which is true, but translucent.
In graduate school, I fudged more on tone of voice—I’d use inflection to suggest that I knew that ‘missionary’ work is often interpreted as problematic.
Even though I stand by my family and respect their work, I struggle not to route my memories through an acceptability filter.
I torture myself this way, strangling the writer’s impulse and responsibility to say things as they were, to invite and face tension bravely.
I’m trying to get better at keeping my business to myself altogether, to staying on topic.
I just say “when I was a kid,” now, don’t disclose more than I have to.
I don’t mention Nicaragua except strategically, to signal that I’m cultured, bilingual, basically “not-your-average-white-guy.” I wonder that all white guys are probably trying to use the one thing they have to break that paradigm, too.
Bolter suggests that with the advent of hypertext writing, things don’t must be tied together in nonfiction, catching the genre up to a century of fiction writing with loose, disjointed, fractured plot.
I make this claim I think a little too boldly— but I also think that creative nonfiction has normalized fragmentary writing, braided essays, and list formats in recent ways that are back-to-print remediations of digital collections, and allow into nonfiction writing a creative opportunity for the reader to engage in inference in ways that nonfiction used to not claim to so much— or did it?
I might
Part 1: Catalog of Relatability
Forgive me for starting with a cliché that I especially dislike.
For as long as I can remember, I’ve always found that My whole life,
While the quality feels inescapable in the present, the truth is my life was not always transnational.
Neither were most people’s.
I was in kindergarten when my parents decided to become Baptist missionaries to a foreign country.
While they toured a few capital cities trying to decide which one to land in, they left me and my four-year-old sister Emma with a sitter.
On the paper chain counting down the days until their return, Mom stapled chewing gum and a puzzle, a few plastic-bagged pieces a day.
On the first day, only two, maybe even none, of the pieces fit together.
The puzzle was only complete the day of my parents’ return having received a sign from God that they would be moving to Nicaragua.
I was in second grade when we moved, first to Costa Rica for language school, then to Nicaragua a year later.
Emma and I were so young.
I don’t remember my first plane ride.
All the plane rides, and all the car rides, all the supporting churches we pitched at for financial support, blur together.
Emma has little-to-no memory of before we moved.
We weren’t given a choice, really.
Or maybe my parents did give us a choice? Maybe the only choice we knew was to choose our parents? Again, this memory is something knotted, flimsy.
Let this space be a decade long.
My first full year living in the United States again, for college, I took an Honors writing class, “Writing About Contemporary Social Issues.” The theme was Borderlands.
Up until the course, I had only mostly culturally-Christian language for this being I had become, which we called a third-culture kid (TCK).
TCKs, a more inclusive word than Missionary Kid (MK), is slang for a transnational child who neither conforms to their home or national culture nor their received or second-home culture.
That honors class gave me a new vocabulary that seemed to attach to my experience of being a weirdo in both the US and in Nicaragua: liminal, marginal, hybrid, double-consciousness.
Later, from a writing mentor, I received another category: poetry of witness.
Part 2: Degrees of Separation
The thorn with using the language of hybridity and witness, to talk about my experiences is that it originates from a critical framework profoundly opposite to my own circumstances.
I’m not Latiné, like Gloria Anzaldúa, or a formerly-enslaved Black man, like Frederick Douglass, or the victim of a major violent struggle, like the anthologized writers of Carolyn Forché’s collection Against Forgetting: Twentieth-Century Poetry of Witness.
If anything, my experience is the exact opposite of the experiences of the very people who originated that language in which I found a way to speak about my life.
Instead of being forcibly taken to America, I was removed from it.
Instead of converting to Christianity under threat or as a result of colonization, I identified with it from the beginning of my life, and participated in my parents’ ministry.
This irony, if you can call it that, was not lost on me.
For much of my college experience, I didn’t know if I wanted to continue identifying as an MK, or a TCK, even Christian.
But the language sticks.
It’s the best thing I have to describe what it means
: to have lived more than half my memory-keeping life outside of the US.
: to be Unitedstatesean lower-middle-class but a Nicaraguan 1-percenter.
: to speak hick in both English and Spanish, fluent in country.
: to be more Christian than most of my American friends but less than my Nicaraguan 1s.
The question I am approaching is the question : “For whom can a language be salient?”
Peter – the first house that was ours
The first house that was “ours” in Nicaragua was so small, walled so that the country that was “ours” (the U.S.) could house its people there.
That’s to say the block was U.S.
embassy-owned: two-story concrete homes, with an L-shaped strip of grass—vines strung in ‘F’s up and horizontal along the concrete walls a story-and a half high, cement and rebar cinder blocks.
(I’ve found a botanical encyclopedia of Nicaragua in the repository of the Universidad Nacional Agraria.
Google would’ve had me saying these flowers are cat’s claw—the yellow flower on the vine looks the same.
They’re really yellow allamandas, the difference being that golden trumpets, as they’re also called, bear a fist-sized spiky seed pod, and leech a milk sap that’s used as an emetic and purgative drug.) The spiky seed pods along the vine grew inside the winding stretched slinky of razor wire on top of the wall.
The biblical book of Job, an early epic poem, is about suffering—this great, justice-doing man, Job, loses his property to a tornado, his family to a collapsed house, and his possessions to raiders, all in the same day.
Then he loses his health, and he itches at his open sores with shards of broken pots.
My dad chose to joke in the years following that he had been reading the Book of Job about the time that we got robbed—in fact, any time something horrible happened to us.
Like as if God threw application questions at us for homework after completing the reading.
But of course they weren’t just questions, word problems—they were us.
This distracts from the point that despite the walls, the gates, the razorwire, the grass that grew in front, the allamanda seed pods, and the dog, no number of spikes could make me feel safe in the house after we were robbed.
Even after a couple more houses on the street were robbed, and the block pitched in to hire and feed a daily patrol, life felt off.
At that time Nicaraguan food first took up residence at home: Azucena, our housekeeper, cooked for the guard on the days when it was our turn among the cooperative.
What's the use of talking about the crime in Nicaragua, as a white American who lived there? Some things are bound to happen, and to plenty of people.
Nicaragua is one of the safer countries in Central America and I had Nicaraguan friends who were robbed at gunpoint in Honduras.
The same messaging about suffering that the Book of Job tries to teach – it happens, who knows why but God, who it’s silly to question—is repeated within a Christian framework when the subject of martyrs comes up.
There’s the OG book, Foxe’s Book of Martyrs, which came out in 1563, and then there’s the update: Jesus Freaks: Stories of Those who Stood For Jesus, released by Christian organization Voice of the Martyrs and the Christian rap rock trio DC Talk.
From the very first martyr, Stephen, to the updated stories of Christian martyrs behind the Iron Curtain and under various other ideological and religious regimes, the point I received as a child was “let the stories of these people suffering worse than you inspire greater faith in God!” For someone with genuine faith, maybe this does work—and as an adult, secular or religious, I still find myself repeating the “it could be worse” logic to myself often.
But I was 9.
And it was a big deal to me.
And lot of things happened to us, as they happen to all people.
Is it evidence of trauma or strength that I’m calloused to disastrous events, because I don't choose to dwell on them? I want to write truthfully, but as I read back, everything just seems like a matter of fact.
A matter of fact can come off as funny, but also as reductionistic and fake.
I finally feel sick to my stomach writing about this.
Maybe because that's the sort of thing you feel when you realize you haven’t been taking seriously before that bad things have happened to you.
“Things are just things,” except they’re not.
Am I a fool for crying over the CD player they stole? Everything was replaced, eventually.
Was there anything they took that wasn’t? Maybe the CD in the player, except I don’t remember what it was.
How tempted I am to leave this paragraph off with “None of it matters anymore anyways,” but I something does matter – and I want to write toward what that is.
This is the moment you realize that this is an essay about process.
But though I could write off my losses – the CD player, the TV, a bike – as “just stuff,” it doesn’t change that I became a hyper-vigilant child who didn’t feel safe.
A nameless, faceless perpetrator became, in my child’s mind, any Nicaraguan, and I became suspicious of anyone that might be near my home.
This is not the picture scared, psychologically sympathetic way.
I took this out on everyone I could—any Nicaraguan.
In markets, walking among the potters, butchers, landscape painters, cobblers, and hammock weavers, I would “see” the particular CD-player that was taken in the robbery.
Years later, even through middle school, I would be convinced that the one a street vendor carried at the stoplight, among the jugglers and boys with stacks of roasted cashews, was the one that was stolen from me.
I might go over to my friend Gabriel’s house to play GameCube and and wonder if his had been bought off the robbers—or if his older brother was the one who had done it.
I would wonder if Azucena had stolen my Legos, the ones that I would find under my bed or behind the bookshelf weeks later.
My parents did right to defend her, but still, was it the robbery that turned little Peter into a racist and a cop? This seems like a stretch.
But per that good old Baptist doctrine of original sin, anyone can be a racist and a cop.
It just takes a nudge, the same way a single, grating offhand comment someone makes can turn them into your enemy.
The driveway gate, steel and green with a fat lock and a heavy chain, was only a dozen feet from the front door with its own deadbolt and its black, iron-barred, keylock screen gate.
When the robbers broke in, our across the street neighbors watched the whole time, thinking that we were moving, or that we had hired someone to.
We’d been 45 minutes away at church, and we knew that they knew—or at least we thought we knew that they knew, that they'd been watching us the whole time.
That year, someone told me that gangs and robbers will leave small signs outside of someone’s house to signal: maybe trash caught in the chicken wire under the gate means they're gone on Saturdays, or shoes hanging over the power lines meant they work late.
Even a smudge of paint on the driveway could mean anything.
That period feels very compressed in my memory—as if it only took a year for us to get a dog, get robbed, send the dog to camp, get a new dog, and move again.
It was longer.
what do u want to hear ? Conzoomerism
the weird thing is that i grew up in both the 1990s and the 2010s at the same time
it was weird to have one of the first iPads and at the same time to have to get off the wifi when mom was on the phone.
Nicaragua has a few local broadcasters, but most of the cable channels came from other sources—the BBC in the UK , Australian football on the Claro sports channel, Disney Mexico’s channels, + the big three of the united states (among others obviously)
there were other channels—like food network and fox news whose contracts weren’t renewed with Claro over time—it’s how we lost boomerang and the cw too
what we lost we later regained as the tech caught up to where we had been
when we got our wii (kinda around 2012 or 2013) and eventually netflix digitized we began catching up on the things we had missed
by ‘things we had missed’ i mean ‘’
the a-team became a quick hit on top of every show we were already watching weekly—ncis and ncis: los angeles on Tuesdays, abc family comedy Wednesdays (my parents loveeeeddd The Middle) and criminal minds Thursdays which emma and I were NOT allowed to watch
one time I sat on the stairs peeking out from under the archway to watch criminal minds – I might’ve been 13 – and I got nightmares
but that time ended when we each started getting smart devices and our own personal computers.
when my parents wanted to upgrade we got the hand-me-downs—my mom’s old computer became the PC that I homeschooled from in 8th and 9th grade
this was also the pc I got hooked on the knockoff of Farmville on
it was called , and while I already knew it was cringe to make public posts requesting elements of the digital game to my wall, I was still requesting things from my friends while they were in school and I was at home on fb ()
I feel like I can pinpoint this time as the one that my media addiction as a kid got its start—right when I got an ipad 2, having convinced my parents that the $400 tablet was worth splitting the cost on with them (all my allowance)
it had just come out, and my parents colleague, my ‘Aunt’ Carmen, had , which she got while on sabbatical in the united states
when finally arrived, it was soon the golden age of ipad apps—and even though I was still homeschooled, I thought I would be the talk of the town if I could just bring my fruit ninja, angry birds, and photo booth to school or youth group
but I don’t remember being allowed – I think I might have snuck it into school once??? but the memes had already made it quite clear that anything Apple made was deeply fragile // plus we’d already been robbed once—i didn’t want to lose something that I had just bought, did i?
the wifi in our house only reached so far—and by that, I mean it was in the living room, barely reached the back porch, the kitchen, and my dad’s office, and petered out at the top of the stairs
when I got my ), i had already been using my iPad to private mode-google the magazine photos of the male avengers cast (chris evans’ Flaunt Magazine shoot primary among them)
I would sit in the back porch hammock, swinging back and forth, with my earbuds plugged into the top of the iPad facedown in my lap, listening to .
after dark was when I filled out the full fantasy of what the internet had to offer me as a young kid who was in the closet and didn’t know it (and later, did)
at the top of the stairs, I would look up videos of boys kissing and let five minutes of it buffer before walking the hallway back to my bathroom where the wifi died, walking along the wood floor beams closest to the walls because those in the center of the hallway creaked
later, in high school, I would watch riverdale and other cw shows (and glee) on my ipad after my whole family had gone to bed, downstairs in the dark in a corner
there was always a chance I would get caught—and I think, a few times, I was, but my parents never said anything: they might ask what I was watching, but they didn’t attempt to stop it
I just wondered how long they had been standing there—by the back porch window, behind the lip of the ipad in the dark, on the edge of the stair—before saying ‘hey, it’s time to go to bed’ or ‘you doing ok, bud?’
I didn’t understand how I was getting away with the media I consumed, but as an adult I almost feel like they should have known ? but on the other hand, all these devices were a first for them, too
our parents didn’t learn the body language of shameful watching on our screens, or switching tabs when they came over to check on our school progress—but there was something in the nod of my dad’s reaction when I came out to them Good Friday of my senior year that made me guess he had just been waiting for me all along.
I feel of two minds about this—it’s another thing on my list to ask about one day.
What is Lakeland to me ? What is a birthplace to one lived there little ? What was Bethlehem to that boy immaculately born in its stable ?
Lakeland is a tall, skinny town running north to south.
Florida Avenue is its spine, with a downtown ribcage enclosing the lakes, its major natural organs.
Two roads, Lakeland’s load-bearing shoulders and hips, run east-west: the Interstate, I-4, and the parkway, a toll road barely as old as me.
It’s got several spindly limbs connected to these major joints: Harden-Sikes-Kathleen, on the west side, and Memorial-Highway 98, on the east.
In South Lakeland, the legs of Cleveland Heights and Lakeland Highlands have great circulation (financially).
Many people have homes we don’t remember.
Mine was my parents’ first house after they married.
Honey-something Road.
My sister doesn’t remember the house after that.
It was next to my grandparents’ house, an orange grove that’s since been developed, and a retention pond.
But I remember it.
It might’ve been called rural once.
It’s out past my dad’s childhood home—which also backed up on an orange grove that’s since been developed, way out on the white-flight side of town not far from where my mom grew up.
It’s been demolished.
Another time I will model it for you—what I remember, and what I didn’t remember.
I don’t need to list the doors – the front, the back, the side, the insides.
What doors do, in Florida, is keep the wrong things out and the right things in (namely, air, water, and animal).
At the age I was when I lived there, I sleepwalked out one of these doors, the one in the garage, to pee on a bush outside.
It was the door next to it that led to my father’s shed, where he refilled used bullet casings from the shooting range, because even if my dad wouldn’t identify as an environmentalist, he would identify as conservationist.
Many young summers, east of Lakeland’s shoulderline, he planted trees, hoping to reclaim some of that land the phosphate industry in central Florida had disposed of.
He hated to see the trees go, and the swamps, and the pine scrub, all lost to 0% income tax and Disney’s Florida Resident Annual Pass.
My mother’s father hated to see the trees go too, because they represented a livelihood and a legacy poisoned by blight and choked by poor choice.
When Papa’s business partner in the citrus brokerage died, he found out just how much debt the company was really in.
No one in our family besides him knows how much he dumped of his own into the pit to turn ledger-red into black again.
In our family, like many generationally Southern white families, it would be improper to talk business with family, and even more improper to ask.
We don’t ask Papa what Mimi said when his mother died, why he quit drinking, why they no longer sleep in the same bed.
I don’t ask what it felt like when his first wife left with Uncle Todd—and Aunt Maggie, who I don’t ever remember having met.
There’re many things, though, that I don’t have to ask—I already know disgrace is worse than sticking out a sickly, snippy marriage.
I already know that the shed in the back yard was a compromise.
I already know about their separate bank accounts, even if no one knows how much might be (or not be) in each.
I wonder if the house is what holds them together, equally precarious as a split-level home is for two Boomers.
The pool brought us there when we lived next door—it still brings us over.
The rest of us all worry over the half-staircases and the hard tile on the half-floor, the hardwood at the bottom and top floors, even though Papa’s got full-metal hips and knees and Mimi’s still in her 70s.
In my aunts’ eyes, worse would be convincing them to move out and purging their home of five decades of interior design, a century of Coca-Cola memorabilia, and a hundred-and-fifty years of family history, which Papa has collected into photo albums, bound books, and shelves on which a cousin-published family history rests next to Douglas Southall Freeman’s four-volume 1934 biography of Robert E.
Lee.
It certainly isn’t the Church that holds them together: While Jan attends a conservative presbyterian church, the one my parents were married in, for a long while Hugh has attended an Episcopal one, its affirming love-doctrine practically the theological opposite to Reformed, salvation-of-the-chosen Covenant theology.
I don’t know what they believe, so I hardly know who they are, and it’s this reason I regret I don’t know who Mimi and Papa were before their heartbreaks.
I can’t imagine them whipping a speed boat on Lake Scott with their daughters skiing behind them.
I can’t picture them cheering from a stand as their eldest cheers for the home team at the Christian school or sitting across from my father for their youngest’s parent-teacher conferences.
All I can see is them in the living room across from one another, both watching Fox now that Wheel of Fortune and Jeopardy! have ended, eating their nightly ice cream and giving their dog – (Dolly, Oscar, Baron, Pippin, or Charming, depending on the period)—one last lick.
We sang our chapter books
our morals
We sang them on our fingers
in circles
We sang books like ballads
as rondeaus
We rhymed “one-two-three john”
with revelation
We rhymed ownership of text
on our tongues
We rhymed race into our eyes
as sure’s if it were God’s
You ask if we felt what we said
we believed we were
You ask if we were what we sang
happy all the time
You ask why someone would make us
who wouldn’t?
We sang ourselves into construction
foundational concepts
We sang ourselves in and out of armies
as armor hanging loosely
We sang candles and freshwater springs
from our bodies and hearts
If you sang it fast enough, spelling almost
sounded out truth
If you knew the motions, you’d be running
shielding your eyes
If you were careful little ears, what you heard
was what it really meant
"In memory of child-like faith"
photograph i/c memory
fence between me and the water
power line
don’t leave me, don’t leave
dead tree split with moss
divining rod
don’t leave me, take me with you
a reflection of the land and trees
no-sky mirror
but yet, so much sky
morning refracts through it
settles on it and in it
bounces through and off it
The sky takes up the overhead, the water,
the fields of vision and scrubgrass
Spanish moss spray-painted
pink and orange and flung into air
the paint sticking it to the dome
and sliding, slowly, away.
only in central florida do i risk it
i swipe left on my home screen, driving
10 under the speed limit on a back road
to catch the shot of the same sky
i’ve seen all summer, the same lake
i swam in, the same trees i climbed
the same sun that’s risen since i was born
a break in the trees
i back up, fully in reverse
to take the shot never
mind the fence, powerline,
I so seldom see the pinks and purples and
oranges on the ground anymore,
like I used to in Catarina, at the arboretum,
that i’ll capture them
from the sky and the water it drips onto.
Locust ,, Langosta
i ,,
i know ,, you’re paid to kill me
twenty-five and five cents the same
under conquista-doers’ names
the histories you tell yourself
are on controlled inflation
consuming like me ,, and growing
there is no small feat on this mountain
i have no fear ,, no wall or razor wire
or boom barrier or guard will prevent my bacanal
no fumigate will block my drive
my droves ,, it hasn’t before
i have been a cloud
ever since that first command from God
i do the work of weeding ,, of famine
of reminder ,, of economy
you’ll need more than a few pins to splay me
crucified in shadowbox with morpho
elephant beetle ,, whip tailed scorpion.
ii ,,
take a leg
,, as a treat
you can have it
if you catch me ,, swat me onto terracota
or soil ,, with flipped broomstick
with blunt end you bunt me
like azucenas ,, on sabbatical
i come ,, dry ,, hard-shelled
soft and connected on the inside
i do not splat ,, try it
i’ll stick with you ,, i am plague
by technicality ,, i sound ,, i roar
i am legion ,, demon
six legs ,, six wings ,, six spines
you don’t have to think of me
but you cannot extract me
i am inextricable from this lawn ,, the bush
the hedge ,, the grass ,, the flower bed
iii ,,
you only wish
i would smite you back
i scrape the earth with my razor teeth
rain fazes me not
leaf-cutters ,, are my allies not
leaf-cutting is my agenda not
i have need for storage not
i glut on green ,, i will until
i am finished or you ,, finish for me
i am temper timeless
hot and cold ,, irascible until
spit-roasted or freeze dried
i am green ,, i consume myself
and multiply ,, see me spotted
,, among the spotted red and green
2020 was a window each American’s been thrown through
the nation’s all babies & bathwater: our lukewarm politics chill upon contact
with unconditioned air — a tropically-longer dry season & a tropically-hotter wet season
make for ... where? the hills offer no comfort. choke on coal choke on smoke
but thumbs don’t choke on the words they type / Thumbs Don’t Choke
On The Words They Type / tHuMbS dOn’T cHoKe oN tHe wOrDs tHeY
tYpE—
babies will choke on anything but milk until they teethe — this doesn’t matter
given they’re still suspended midair out the window — can you see this freeze-frame in your mind — what perspective do you see it at? tell me what’s behind the child —
is it a bathroom with a three-paned mirror & a full medicine cabinet —
or is what’s behind what’s outside the house — is it an alley is it a lawn is it a
cornfield
what will the baby land on when the freeze-frame thaws?
Aunt Cora, you were given a baby; remind me what you did when they took her back — did you know you were going to turn your diary in-to her before you did?
Profond aujourd hui:
Deep today
print extremely full, all hatching
few crossing, just faint branch outlines
like mountaintops of glass and high contrast grass
roots of flowers' origins off-canvas
but mottoed banners fluttering messages in synechdoche
with stench in wind's foretaste
blood-drips drop diagonally off sword one
sword two swaying off belt
like reverse necktie like furry tail
doe with staghead holding it off the wall
cuck euphemism for a while now bambi first thought
four necks ring tired pipes blunted metal
rest of insides of food chain
likely lay soundless at another camp
or maybe bones already dried in sun behind doehead
bat only one with laughter on its lips still
wolfsnarl stuck within it , goat concern
cat surprise at hot cauterizing swing
what to make of tent cluster: who slept there?
when portrait pose ends, what falls into frame,
and what slips into history's waste basket's bowl?
inside's a lot
unlit by doe's simple halo
unframed by single-sheeted lithograph prints
this may be a clumsy end to reach
like writing piano concertos to celebrate mass death.
[VOU, no. 64, 1958]
Ode to Heimweh
have you lost track
of yourself again?
it’s okay.
it wasn’t really that you misplaced the time;
you just were just here,
leaning up against that counter
in the kitchen back home,
eating mac and cheese
straight from pot
like you used to.
you can still see it, can’t you?
the speckled tile
you would lie on after being outside,
the broom next to the fridge
that you’d use to clean up
the ceramic shards of a broken dish
carefully, because you were barefoot
and can’t you smell?
the hot, soapy steam
of cleaning dishes,
and the oily breath of pizza.
or the pssst a coke makes
before you pour Fresca
and Fanta Uva into the same cup
and drink it, grinning
Do you remember what the microwave timer sounds like?
How you and your best friend pulled so hard to separate
the Tupperware lid from the glass dish?
And the crash of the silverware drawer when you hit your hip on it—
There you are
Using the words you saved just for the occasion —
was it the right hip, or the left?
How good it is to know, after all this time,
that you remember
that you’ve brought yourself with you.
notesapp tryptich in which telling the truth gets easier
1
What light escapes the towns, the Mercedes plant,
and the gas stations,
the clouds return to the canopy,
but light vantablacks in the forests:
a dark void with frilly treetops.
They move in corridors, trampling
any light escaping like ghost horses
at battle. The green in the ground
stores up in winter and spring
so that in summer they may deliver
themself.
2
Upon summer,
the offensive begins: the land leans forward;
the air thickens and perfumes;
trees stoop to meet you, your face, your shoulders,
to tap your shoulder. What makes you
think that the world you demand
will be any better at listening?
You don't hear the crickets and the frogs—
do not hear the trees in stormwind
sway and crack, or the warning warmth
of summersun.
3
Hope
without action is daydreaming.
Lasagna is the cake of pastas.
Most of my words are scavenged grist
for content mills — but
I think of the people I love
as famous. I am so close
to declaring myself to be
a moralist. After storms, the forest floor
brindles with a wash of pine dust;
a minigolf-course Tower of Babel floods.

Ghazal for Arjeet
After Ed Yong at the
Atlantic
and a tweet by Zeynep Tufekci:
ﬁwe should not yearn for the normal: ‚Normal led to this'ﬂ
Thank God for the miles between us; I can step back with
a tap water while you lament the new abnormal.
You'd trained for hurricanes and school shootings but sickness
is what, child of physicians, blasts away your normal?
You said without social interaction you wither,
and is this what you would return to, this old normal?
your waking, working, playing, and sleeping, can renormal-
-ize. Morph a brand new life as your life around you shifts.
may adaptation and skill, wisdom and tact and faith
be what you're known forŠ not where you were when your normal
died. It's happened to my family before, that crisisŠ
an earthquake for a month, add three for civil unrest,
and now, for six, disease. My ﬁplans-changeﬂ family normal.
I say this not as ﬁshame,ﬂ it's not as a ﬁlook at us,ﬂ
I say this to say ﬁwelcome.ﬂ Welcome to our normal.
first draft of an acrostic elegy
remember the cool tile of the english building? we both sat on it
across from each other the day we met before spanish and english
writing became our primary meeting medium over the summer
sending missives that got longer, longer, deeper nevermind the duties
of camp and family and she-who-must-not-be-named.
no way i’d’ve predicted you would be the one riding to alabama
a day’s journey with me
recapping our summers and expounding what music gave us life
our love languages, and how we each drove speed-limit-conscious
what a time that was! zero to one hundred only three years in now
still you know more of me than most people neighbors, friends
or roommates. you’ve read more of my poetry, too.
now, a crucible, a schism, emotional chasm realizing, reckoning,
and yet, friendship
read, let poetry do the heavy lifting, if you can write, when ready
agape, philia, eros, storge: loves, trampled. someday to gently return.
All summer I watched heat trace the scaffolding of thunderheads
Beneath them dynamite and water jet cutters made all the earth a quarry
But as I drove into the storm
there was no enveloping
It was a subduction
and as I pushed deeper under it
& it pushed deeper over me
I heard the tension building as the culverts choked
I saw the wind pick up the hems of the land / roads melted
I smelled the pricking fear as the story of a scorch stuck twice
and then thrice / the trees' and sands' burns like ink on linen
A landscape scriptorium wherein was written a declaration of presence
as my crust melted into a mantle of conviction / my weighted petitions drawn core-ward
My transformer popped and my breakers tripped \ mortared by the might of the blast.
In a room that served as insect-abattoir & ossuary \ my naked startle could not be undone
for I was undone
/ you had mortared the altar and boundary stone.
I think I can I think I can
Yes, I cried.
Yes, I thought about your body
politic. The concessions stand:
If it were to hurt me, you would
quit seeing him.
You know you
are nowhere near the first one to say
my timing is much too inconvenient—but
you didn’t say that. It’s only ever a series
of my memories:
his brown door
closed to knocks. A FaceTime call,
hikes in which friendship’s a fence,
a day-long drive home from Miami,
now your car.
I’ve made playlists
each time the feelings are made
clear (confirmed in the negative),
as I learn to read silence, to be
honest to myself:
A process // habit:
am I a joke to you? Things aren’t irreparable
That kinda day! hurts, doesn’t it? I’m uncertain
about l*ve, haven’t heard from you. soft pain
of loss, hello.
Yes, I’m taking
this quite well. I’m learning. I hadn’t realized
until now, that a purposeful information delay
melts through my grace like Sprite does
through cotton candy.
Every Floridian must write a gator poem,
In Florida, there are four ways a gator may contribute to society.
(1) join a small roadside attraction. (2) become a county fair fried food.
(3) serve as a university mascot. (4) retire to gator havens run by The Mosaic Co.
We once called some land “moonscape,” what phosphate strip mining left over.
The marketers now call some land “reclaimed,” a network of stocked ponds.
Anywhere, she will rule, and anywhere, we will fear her.
In Polk City, at Lake Helene, the gators are quiet swimmers.
They hang chin-up in the water, peeking their buoying eyes.
Their timpani ears guide them to jumps and splashes.
A Fish & Wildlife officer blasts gatorgulps from a portable speaker.
They’re lured to the edge of the floating dock; his son binds their mouths.
The thirteen-year-old stacks them in the covered bed of a black Silverado.
... or, Poem for my Half-Birthday
For six years, though I had to rescue some, no one died while I lifeguarded.
The distance between a flash & its thunder is five seconds per mile.
Hair-raising is the sense of the just-before.
Clouds scrape: a false white horizon of cirrostratus cuts across the sky.
They’re slower than low, raw, torn cotton before a storm.
I hope I’m not the only one watching.
The sky deserves your eyes, too.
The senses do quicken, with practice.
I’ve watched sunflowers turn their heads in timelapse.
I tuned my ears to hear the heartbeats of children.
Splashing crowds the senses, but silence is the worst sign.
Looking & listening & feeling are how to save your life.
Teen Angst as the Family Corixidae I thought a while about
what I said wrong
more clearly than when I leftI came to the conclusion that
when I went wrong
I would be as fine as before
unrequited love returned
to every water we shared:
slow rivers and ponds,
household pools, saline shorelines,
Rejected want returned to it
like the water boatman
my eyes did pursue you
and your feeling of non-desire
did pursue the surfaces
of virtually any freshwater habitat
striations on your lower back
to oviposit on
It is now, finally, gone
I was a halophile
I wanted to taste your salt
to inject my enzymes
to externally digest you
I wanted it extremely
fewer objects and more distance
to suck you back inside me
Would give me peace
you were never a backswimmer
for my consumption
you swam forward
swung forward and back
I imagined and imagined and imagined
oar-shaped tarsi

Tic Tac Toem
you &
you & i
you
i have
have never
& i
never left
left
have never
left
not even
your idea
come to me
& in class
dated no
one
had the
ability
writing
essays
your boy
-
friend
being on
bad terms?
we're still
steady
making
music
in a way
you
i'd tell
what's
makes it
seem like
we
tell me
what you
dream of
between up
and down
debate our
existence
a death
out of order
a lily asks "where's Ah?" a cloth covers her
"you —
I love you"
the men lift, shift, drop
Beauty says "just one more"
—forehead kiss—
she tells me
"move"
gurney comes in
mom mid-hug
whispering
jet-lagged:
to see her go, they weren't there either
really important
for grandma
that we be there,
called as poetry read
"are you busy?
come to the house"
they didn't tell me
to stop
scanning her for
short shifts
to stop searching
for slow sighs
i sat across from
the bed
in the armchair
grandma sat Jin watching her daughter
sleep-die
I-]wrapped
in blankets failing
to keep heat there
except for what's
holding on:
Death's hand
a grimacing
tolo-|calm face, cousin-kissed:
they don't tell me how
yellow
a body becomes.
After another day
one old woman and a second one
much will be said of these mothers, these great grandmothers.
i was for so long more interested in their artifacts than their breath.
*
a shadow moves. it is their other lives, stalking.
if her father’s plane had not been shot down in the war,
if her husband’s wife had stayed.
if her brother’s motorcycle had not crashed, killing him.
if her husband had been shot somewhere else.
being born after the war instead of before.
being born before the war instead of after.
the low tinkle of porch chimes is the sound of afternoon.
the nurse’s cap in the portrait on her mantle, the heels they all wore,
the certificates against the wall on the closet shelf.
continuing education, forty years after having five children.
the invention of antibiotics : radiation’s connotation change.
her job at the frame shop between Papa John’s and Publix,
design, interior in the era of pastel, then stationery.
the lab coat in her Lincoln, her invented title as a branded woman,
sending factory-cut branded brownies in the mail.
older than my very life by three and four times, they hold on.
the second old woman & I & the first one
they have only barely read about themselves,
though they wrote their own life’s picture books.
a shadowbox on the wall, a framed testimony,
a handed-down diary in which she is a child
bible number six read cover-to-cover, marked-up next to kafka,
a history under a novel under a treatise under plated puzzle pieces.
they sang in their respective choirs.
other than in pew, she reads little, or, i have never seen her.
what i see: all the books on the shelves are self-help.
her husband’s family’s history hangs over her chair,
i am afraid to say more for fear of being cruel. i am so sad.
backs, blood, ankles, wrists.
the bodies of these women, and how they stiffen.
i am no stranger to this process, the bodystiffening.
they see the same masseuse.
she has fallen enough times to admit it is time
to begin packing for a level home.
she asks for help removing the bandaid
from the place the doctors found another spot.
i will be there that day
to hold their yellow hands.
the old city and us and the new one
it was a small town, once.
in two, quickly-blurring corners,
they’ve lived off the same road
but called it by different names
for the first 20 years, it was a road
north:heights to south:lake
they were unaware of this.
maybe they shopped the same Publix, the first in the nation.
for the last 20, the road between runs
east:highlands to west:creek,
the orange groves between them bulldozed,
that narrow road narrowly widening.
the dining table up against the wall
the sound of leaves whispering
everything reminds me of these women, my homes.
the heavy air after rain
the screen of an open window
i call her after the hurricanes;
she calls after the tornadoes.
i ask after the trees, whether they survived.
the older saw Death collect two daughters.
the younger loves me worse.
the first Publix is a DMV.
the mind is a retention pond.
Program Yielding the Impossibility of Digital Reproduction
> open New Document
(86+N)
> input dimensions
(select unit 'feet') input Height: '4'
> Tab
Input Width : '3'
> (&+return)
sele Magins Columns (8: Doin (U Down (.) Down (u) Down () = inches
> New Layer
> right click > select Grids & Guides > select Show Grid (key 'p') Pen tool [> click
cl
ick Shift+ click click click 1
[> click + drag
click Shift + click click-to-join
[> select color + [choose color]
[> select effects [fX] > select fill > Opacity : drag to 40
repeat as desired
> New Layer
(key 't') Text tool > click-and-drag to create Text Box
> type: 'P'+'O'+'I'+'S'+'O'+'N'
> esc
> select Font: 'Blackletter Athletic'
> select Stroke: Up (1) Up (1) = 2 pt.
> right click > select Step & Repeat
Count : 5
Offset : .66 feet
> Enter
[ select Effects [IX] > select fill > Opacity: drag to [%] | [ select Color > [desired color] > select Tint : drag to [%] ]
repeat for individual letters as desired
> (key 'v') Select tool > select text box > highlight fifth 'O' down > change to 'R' > esc (key 't') Text tool > click-and-drag to create Text Box between 3rd and 4th 'POISON'
The Christian girlies LOVE talking about seasons
How much control am I willing to cede? I keep asking myself this —
sometimes it’s like there’s a line break between me and God.
Like I haven’t been paying attention. So I’m surprised my toenails grew out
again, my dog is under a bush, there’s a new bird chirping. I see swallows.
The wisteria froze and withered, and though it’s already almost summer,
it’s spring now. My hunch is that God’s favorite color is light green.
My watch smells like all the colognes I’ve sprayed on my wrist since college:
pepper, rose, bergamot, lime — I’m subscribed to tiny vials of flora.
Was that crazy to say? Light green is THAT color, in all plant classes:
It grows more than three meters a day, bamboo and kudzu and blackberry,
and light green is giving me that springtime religion—
That turn of the light is why God put all his favorite holidays there.
Gardens look real good in spring, when even the small things,
Moss and algae and lichen, and bugs, resurrect out of gray and brown.
I take my dog to three different gardens every week. Gardens are good
for naming things, and for kissing and for sweating, and for discovering,
and for long cries. I bet when Jesus died, he came back light green —
because God LIVES for a resurrection, and who doesn’t need a little more life
in their life?
hurricane
written with Lucille Clifton in hand
1
Sometimes I follow by ravine
after the sound of rushing water
to find only firm
high winds in the trees
at the top of a hill.
A stranger told me yesterday
it’s been windy here since January.
The wind carries
that bark in the distance
that I hear twice, my tail curling
toward the too-whit! too…
I face a cliff I come upon
over the real rushing,
a great amount of shallow creek.
When I throw a stick in the woods,
it becomes every stick, all the wood,
falling at once, itself, collective.
2
I came out here
because when I said “we”
I saw you see yourself separate.
You’re like this creek after a storm,
its surface still but its current
strong, your secret murk.
I want to chase you, but I would not
become your new enemy. I would
only walk with you until you turn clear.
After all, all we have are the same
words as each other. Whether to share
a memory is a powerful choice.
I mostly remember feeling how
in your car, at the table, on the couch,
you would not look at me.
Now, looking downhill, I realize
there’s another trail above us.
Come on, there’s just a short duff
to cross between them! Do it
with me! Then, will you come see
what here looks like from there?
3
Another tree fell. And once,
when I said the truth, they walked away.
I will not tell you what they did this time;
what matters is my hand, reaching
out. In springsummer, I can tell
the difference between life and death, and again
there are fresh trails of timber,
and the uplate sun warms the dust.
I admit I walked for days without reading.
The stillness of anticipation
was nothing compared to the peace,
the rest of revelation.
I see the holes in my friends.
There is a clear steep trail down to the water
—above the strongrushing creek,
there is a dry bed: spring has fallen silent.
Remember I put no faith in the so-called
goodness of people. Or my goodness.
Emma, Gustavo, Nicole
“No es incendio ni muerte / es Somoza que pasa.” - Ernesto Cardenal, Epigramas
I. Emma
When you first moved
to Nicaragua, power cut
off, morning or night,
for five-ish hot hours.
Ortega promised to restore
full-time power to homes,
full-time jobs to Nicaraguans,
thirty-year-old ¡Viva la Revolución!
Soon after the election,
outages were only squirrel-induced.
II. Gustavo
You reached middle school,
took diesel-powered field trips
to diesel power plants—
shipped straight from Venezuela.
Another trip was archeological:
you dug up Tisma,
artefactos indios: broken pottery.
Ate at McDonald’s afterward.
You’d found a metatarsal.
Was it sacred land?
III. Nicole
In your sophomore year
the canal was announced,
Supporters were bused in
for Ortega’s downtown rallies,
It’d displace Native Americans
and pollute Lake Cocibolca:
protest groups faced Orteguistas
at a circular plaza,
Pope John Paul II’s
obelisk amidst the clash.
IV. Nicole
The Árboles de Vida
were erected junior year,
Hugo Chavez’s own plaza
at one crucial roundabout.
$25,000 each,
lining main roads city-wide,
when protests break out
they’re the first destroyed.
Vice President-First Lady
calls you a minúsculo.
V. Gustavo
May, after thirty deaths:
you watch from home
as students call “resignation”
across the table, face-to-face.
Paramilitares wield social media
to target protesting students;
Ortega controls television, blames
“delinquentes de la derecha.”
Journalists, parishes, universities, barrios
under Toyota Hilux siege.
VI. Gustavo/Nicole/Emma
The school year’s begun.
You’ve changed your @;
at the call center,
Texan women want managers.
Cinderblock tranques torn down,
not murals naming Desaparecidos.
“Ortega, Somoza” —not aloud—
still “la misma cosa.”
You’re able to leave,
deep guilt takes root.
Dear George ,
The Jenkins are a name all over town now, which surely you must have seen coming--
you, George, and your daughter Carol, a billionaire to her death two years ago.
All your kids worked at the store at 16, while others worked their way up, got company stock--
All the kids I know worked at your store or the Chick-fil-as on either side of town.
What were your secrets?
I might never live in a city without a Publix, but you’ve priced me out, George!
-- of everything but Chicken Tender Subs and BOGOs on ice cream.
“Where shopping is a pleasure, you say” --
and I got a free sugar cookie every time from the bakery as a kid, my sister chocolate chip.
When you began Lakeland’s supermarket, it took a decade for you to install the bakery
from which I bought 2-dozen rough-crystal sugar cookes per month but ate more quickly,
and it took you even longer to install the delis and pharmacies
where my grandma checks her blood pressure, and the big scale I realize I’m an adult on.
Five years before you died, you launched Plato the Publixasaurus--
and I had his game on CD-ROM for WindowsXP, Publix Preschool Pals.
Plato was an advocate for schools, the food pyramid, and the environment--
but to me the T-Rex I was obsessed with then looks a lot more like a gator.
In the childrens’ museum downtown, the play grocery is a Publix with mold-cast veggies--
When we outgrew that, I took the ACT & SAT at the school named for you. It was cold.
What did you do at night ? Even the colleges in town bear your name, your daughter’s--
the dorm I lived in was named for your daughter’s sons.
The field house with the basketball court and assembly stands bore your family name--
but the mens dorm with the same was a wet and odored suites, a frat-house substitute.
Carol spent $800,000 in opposition to legalizing medical marijuana,
which in my first election, I voted in favor of.
After 3 posthumous lifetime acheivement awards, people began to question the donations--
how every win in the city you somehow facilitate, thirty years removed from this earth.
Impulse, Susan M McCullough, 2019
i ask them
to look up
until we’ve seen
a shooting star
i lay down in
a pile of ants
our eyes deem
to pierce them
i tell them
we won’t leave
even if it takes
until midnight
and we look up
into moving clouds
and flit left & right
begging for a meteor
same way i
search a painting
i beg the pinks
for meaning
a rusty red
is bleeding
a charcoal grill
brush drags
weather’s turn wakes
spirit to fire’s joy
o, spirit of
anticipation
skating, splits,
a jump, cut flat
awaiting depth to
pounce, green & bright
incapable of taking
in the whole sky
as for form
from gray
a sulfur yellow
film, spill, scrape
activating paints
taint white & teal
christmas feels
three months early
a familiar recital
played a beat too slow
rest deeply needed
for comet flaming out
swing into atmosphere
from ice into heat
on this day six years ago
ekphrastic after facebook memories
I can prove so much about me
& I see now how I came off
on the table there’s laid a full spread
of “breakfast for dinner with these sweet people”
I wouldn’t have eaten half the things — the eggs,
the banana, too much bacon, the pulpy orange juice
not even the honey or maybe just a little of it
to moisten the chocolate chip pancakes with sugar
my sister had a lion’s mane of hair sitting next to me
which she never did except our parents weren’t there
and our ministry-grandparents and ministry-aunt
were the ones sharing with the world they cared for us
my plastic glass is full of milk and I have a tank top on
I am a senior in high school and i haven’t come out to anyone
but I am beginning to plan it so I smile, and I see in my eyes
the look of a tiktokker I follow now who’s maybe a year older
than I was in the picture . I wonder about him because all he presented
was himself but the comments section asked him for months
if he was gay which eventually he said yes and moved to New York
I am sorry I forgot I was telling you about this picture
the grandfather clock in the back doesn’t work and the water dispenser
cools the water too much for my liking and the melamine plates are bumpy
these ministry grandparents — Uncle A and Aunt Di — send me
Christmas cards and care packages but I haven’t seen them in years
they grew up on the amazon river themselves a son and a daughter
of missionaries and I won’t bore you with the details
because I haven’t collected them yet but I want to know
what happens to kids like us when we grow up
do we all go back overseas where we feel we belong
do we all choose the lives our parents chose
someone I don’t know did a survey of missionary kids
she asked so many questions and while the answers varied
there’s one answer that found me where I needed to be found
it said : “thank you for asking. no one ever thinks to ask”
“For the Bible / Tell Me So,”
or, “For the Bible / Tells Me So”
1.
some of my classmates could read you in three languages—
and from you their other names were designed
Insu, Ham Bin, and others exchanged for Juan, Samuel, Joseph—
chosen for them by their parents
maybe to make it easier,
maybe to protect them from the butchery
they had their own table at lunch, and own church, and own worship band
2.
my name is yours, by proxy of an children’s allegory of your events
has any Peter been Magnificent? we’re all doubters, deniers, czars,
runners, pretenders, even the saints of us for failing
Jesus, when we were in the garden, I drew a sword
to defend you— but you healed your attacker’s servant
I ran away, but followed, and ran away again for good measure
3.
I discharge myself of conscription to your defense
You call yourself a sword— I can’t argue out of this;
In fact, you, yourself, have cut at me, myself, often
I’ve spent summer after summer trying to walk on a lake,
watching, thinking about you.
4.
“… one of my beliefs, which is that anyone can be a bigot,”
Acie says, and I wonder in my bed what a bigot is made of:
packets of words, or tones—stashed in the mind, or heart?
5.
I will spend the next 70 years advocating
For an endlessness that justifies the ends
means don’t justify ends or endlessness
means are signs of justification done
When we killed infinity, a divide by zero error
Broke the math of the accountant
The debt-reminder, the accuser

Cosmology
After Philip Schaefer’s “Gradually Then Suddenly” :
“… A heavy kite
could touch Jupiter if Jupiter existed.”
The year my dad quit his job at the Christian high school
(basketball coach, high school biology and Bible teacher)
he packed his buckets of fossils fished from Peace River
into storage with the Celtics jersey and the wedding dress—
whale bones and mammoth teeth and ammonites
a review of what was flesh but now is just rock.
“Millions of fossils / buried in rock layers / laid down by water / all over the earth”
“A soft answer turns away wrath / but grievous words stir up anger.”
Meanwhile I laid out a six-foot long puzzle
of the solar system, maybe 48 big pieces total,
a ninth of the sun on the left, Pluto on the right—
(remember at this point we had no photos of Pluto)
my Sunday-to-Friday teaching that it took God
just as long as I to assemble all of this and clean it up again.
God,
how many selfies have you
taken of yourself?
billions if not more
living a dimension smaller
living in negative reels
you submerge me
in acid and silver
i bought a camera
last month on layaway
(the same way you bought
me a decade ago)
it’s all that I could ask for—
a viewfinder to see
dials to control perspective
what compels you
to remove reels
from their clipped places on a line?
Is it random?
Is it a plan you made
or do you hear the negatives
scream to be developed?
What sound wakes
Your power flashes in the night sky, in and on and out of the low clouds lit by lights below them.
I watch for it, but I look away every time the display flashes again— like watching for a waiter
to pass by but not being quick enough to catch their attention. I want to know that the lightning
is symbol, is safe, is hitting flagpoles rather than trees or homes.
My first year of college, I was asleep in my grandmother’s home, in a bed quilted and shared
over the years by my sister, our cousins and their husbands, my parents, and an aunt who was
about to die. Both me and grandma woke up mid-night to a flash-bang, so near as to shake
the walls. The next day, the house on the corner had burned down completely, an off-white
structure reduced to a black char-spot in the grass— and who’s to say it couldn’t’ve been us?
I finally catch the sky lit up. I imagine I know Morse code and catch a message in the flashing.
When the wire stills, I watch my pupils dilate — the window sinks back into the wall, the sky
into the window. The lightning is behind me now, out a different window. Could it strike the cell tower? The dead tree in my back yard, like the vulture tree in The Jungle Book? What tiger
of the self might I soon fend off with a flaming brand — what bear will sacrifice himself
to save me? What colonizer will claim the story?
Gosh can’t you take the focus off of yourself for once? Jesus thinks too of kids in their parents’
beds, frightened by the storm. Of the dogs under the same beds, or under the same covers.
Of the animals who in their own ways prepare for the processes of nature that have always been
that you perceive to be unique. He thinks too about the people without windows to look through
at the storm, or who would give anything for a storm, for the hint of rain. Do you look toward the thunderhead with gladness or do you pull the tarp closer, check the tent pegs and secure them?
What in you will the storm erode?
Devotions
We are devoted
each
To the ethereal
Devoted to worth
worth
to being something
tangible
to loving
being
loved for your actions
unique
helpful
accomplishments
Locked in to seeking rest
a chance to
Do you get
it yet?
Have you gotten
what you want?
do
to the thing
right
safe
around people who are
Or being
alone
to pursue
safety
rest
love
on your own terms
Why can’t your life can’t be lived you ask
Aren’t these your terms?
Don’t they satisfy
your
Have you yet found love-lust?
trust-lust?
long-lost
goodness?
independence?
peace?
keep chasing
You could but you don’t have to
but what would you do instead?
Go back to the beginning
?
devote yourself a new
to ethereal
noun
But what would that be?
So many have left me
nouns empty
Are there that will not me
empty of
what
I shouldn’t begin with am I becoming
maybe
I should start at
what was
I being emptied of
Wanting being emptied me of myself
loved loving \
held holding \
seen seeing \
known knowing as I am
Is this too
reductive
Or is it not enough
Maybe is I am
is gerund-less
has nothing to do with
actions
I cannot be of
emptied
I am being of
nouns gerunds
not
love loving
not
hope hoping
not
truth knowing
So I will devote myself to
I am
in love
I am
safe
I am
known
I am
I know
I am
here
I’m sure. Yes. Hello.
May 2020 III. Vigilance
Maddie says we shouldn’t stress / in heaven, she says, the war’s already been won
the cicadas scream otherwise / their siren warning, warning, loud even over the motorboats
of Florida summer / the nurse heeds them, writes a handbook / nightly mask bleachwashes rote
memory for troupes of teenagers / telling each other things / will be okay if they stay in the sun
incomplete data / complete disarray / believers sing a wish / to come undone
while I battle paper wasps and horseflies / songs and prayers aren’t what lay the poison moat
around my sleeping-place / and the perch from which I’m watching for close
calls on the water / lake of endless potential emergencies / canoes, water snakes, any bacterium
every plague is a transfer of energy / a forced meditation on connectivity, contact
but plague does not always belie a war / conflict a secret enemy beneath the fabric of the universe
persecution is not found in a difference of opinion / or in accountability for a liturgy of hurts
shouldn’t she have known that? of course—and of course not / ‘should have seen’ and ‘couldn’t have’
meet at a concussive blow to the neck of a Black child / whistle blows thrice for emergency action
it becomes my duty to bring him to shore / to direct all witnesses’ movement in a single direction
June 2020 IV. Closet
it’s always been my duty even before to direct my eyes towards movements to take direction
a lineage of counselors that have come before to see a child who’s running away, to negotiate detente
and return them to the fold that was before I saw the child was my grandparents, them flaunt-
ing a mammy doll in the corner of a hallway where before I used to dance in Narnia pijamas reinspection
of childhood opens a Bible where after the Civil War ended, the Coachman family registry had a section
for the names of enslaved people. after papa says the quiet part out loud, my mother and my aunts
scold him, but mimi says nothing after some time she posts it on Facebook instead: HERE IS ALL I WANT
it reads: a chain post, like a prayer she sent to end the pandemic afterwards she backpedals at my objection
when a child runs from conflict, counselors pursue them when kids lash out, counselors take the blow
when i pursue my grandparents, their shells close around them am i to counsel them or cancel them?
i have no home to send them: Limbaugh runs the linoleum kitchen, Carlson owns the green-carpeted den
my sister takes to the streets at camp, I try to bridge homeschoolers and Eagle Lake kids, propose
a view through the eyes of Jesus himself killed unjustly, himself faultless in his death, himself an obit
that would change world’s weight himself spun into fool’s gold narratives, three-syllable counterfeit.
Queered Simile
It’s like what if you drowned in metaphor
Like what if you force your head down into mystery & lightshadow & overcastshadow
Like you choke on the wisteria in its own lilaclight as it drapes the pollenpuffs
Like if you walk your boxer without washing you cross town without bathing
You’re in your sackcloth era your Job era your Jonah era your Ophelia era
It’s giving you could make a whale puke you up
Oh my hands yeah they cracked from lye and goatmilk shopped locally
I kept washing with the bad soap until they bled and flaked and didn’t tell anybody
It’s like what if you lifted your head from the retention pond to rescue yourself
The trouble with waiting is the value system that lets it go on or not
In a TikTok I saw a letterboard that said Discipline Is Selfcare
I collect dead animals I find on my phone: A mummyfrog on pinestraw
A deer splayed over the rocks by the road by the creek giving St. Sebastian
A deadfrozen vinebush browning against 6 a.m. indigosky in Florida
An adult scorpion in the doorframe of my parents’ Kia
Lizard eggs in a deadboltsleeve in my nolongerhome
My childhooddog, now in a hole my papa dug next to my sister’s in my grandmothers rosegarden
It’s like they are worthy creatures: I value the wren twodimensionalized onto asphalt
Sometimes my boxer is a cow with a triple gastrectomy, not in his cudchew era
So grass comes out of him in strands longer than my hand, it’s giving a passing of its own.
Simile of the ‘20s
It’s like what if you drowned in metaphor
Like what if you force your head down into mystery & lightshadow & overcastshadow
You choke on the wisteria in its own lilaclight as it drapes the pollenpuffs
You walk your boxer without washing You cross town without bathing
You’re in your sackcloth era Your Job era Your Jonah era Your Ophelia era
It’s giving you could make a whale puke you up
Oh my hands? Yeah they cracked from lye and goatmilk I shopped locally
I kept washing with the bad soap until they bled and flaked and didn’t tell anybody
It’s like what if you lifted your head from the retention pond to rescue yourself
The trouble with waiting is the value system that lets it go on or not
In a TikTok I saw a letterboard that said Discipline Is Selfcare
I have a discipline of photographing dead beings I find: A mummyfrog on pinestraw
A deer splayed over the rocks by the road by the creek giving St. Sebastian
A deadfrozen vinebush browning against 6 a.m. indigosky in Florida
An adult scorpion in the doorframe of my parents’ Kia
Lizard eggs in a deadboltsleeve in my nolongerhome
My childhooddogs, now in holes my papas dug in my mimis rosegarden, near a wellpump
It’s like they are worthy creatures I value the wren twodimensionalized onto asphalt
Sometimes my boxer is a cow with a triple gastrectomy In his cudchew era
So grass comes out of him in strands longer than my hand It’s giving he passes too.
tried to revise this
VHS Sunday School Songs
In memory of childlike faith
We sang our chapter books
Our morals
We sang on our fingers
In circles
We sang the books like ballads
As rock music
We rhymed “one-two-three john”
with revelation
We rhymed we loved the Bible
With our tongues
We rhymed race into our eyes
As precious as God
They asked if we felt what we said
We believed
They asked if we were what we sang
Happy all the time
We sang ourselves into a mansion
As foundational concepts
We sang ourselves into an army
From our bodies and hearts
We sang candles and freshwater springs
Linked in one big family
If we sang it fast enough, spelling almost
Sounded out truth
If we knew the motions, we were running
Shielding our eyes
If we were careful little ears, what we heard
Was Father looking down.
To Gather Stones, to Throw Them
In sixth grade, I had a pet stone with a mouth and eyewhites.
Like a fist, I kept the stone in my pocket until a recess
when my bullycrush threw it over the razorwire toward the slaughterhouse.
When my father returned from the mines, he brought scraps of mountain,
amberquartzes like jackfruit that hung between a worker and company gold.
The stones are implicated in everything, hiding inside themselves.
Animals hide in their names, like labrador in a mineral, cateye in an agate.
Sometimes animals themselves are there, petrified, the mollusks older than my name.
I had rocks in my head at age fourteen, at my second birth.
I gathered my soul between the cliffs where I left my sandals. At the beach I left
every urchin tucked in his rockpool. Spending hours at the market, I asked the price
of jewelry in the raw. I asked, How many is the cost? I said, How much is the value?
I got my last merit badge describing the implications of stone,
in distinguishing firerock from mineral crushed into itself until its transformation
by a flood and the world’s weight. Each has its use.
The Father put stones into the world to work, like the limestone
running under my feet and seaming the walls together and filling in the rebar
so that when the faultstones crack, the house will stand witness to wisdom and rock.
Stones were always near enough for perishing:
numbered for the altars a firepillar dances on, stacked high enough
for the plummet of a swinelegion, for a Stevenstone of lawyers.
Once, I found a geode along the roadside; I dropped it at my father’s command.
When the Father returns, it’ll open its mouth and life will pour out,
no hammerstrike necessary. I hear that if I’m silent, the rocks will sing.
What all came with me / Who came with me
play-bite, blood-blister
sister-soror, shirt-winter
splinter-hole, banister
aunt-leather, uniqlo
paper-paper, spiral-bound,
thread-connected, many-places
poem-holes, compartments,
mullet-shield, ridicule
Self-portrait.
a leg shakes iambic like an em
keep the nerve engaged so it doesn’t pinch, so it stays awake. the skin-care sequence sporadic like a metaphor of strawberries picked as at-one-time crushes.
blessing framed as Grace my sister’s middle name grace upon grace a God-scholarship to life a beca, in Spanish in English, Abeka:
13 years of ACSI-accredited christian school curriculum
a home, 2 nations, an internet — isn’t every drive a road trip?
“A Scout is … thrifty,” in between “cheerful” and “brave”
sale-shirt, swap-coat, gift-shoes, thrift-pant not the skin i was born in the 153rd generation of skin.
genealogies : name sakes :: misspellings : lost meanings
a tiny person in the driver’s seat just behind the eyes a think tank behind that (a Holy chairman and rotating fellowships make up the body).
fruit bearing fruit bare fruit Fruity
Pebbles apple lemon caper knowledge of good and evil:
the dust I am and the dust I have collected.
Writing Assignment 4 – transcription of my page
Parents Playlist
The love shack rings with rock and roll given by god on an island on its own, 1100 miles away, a message in a glass vessel washes up in the rainstorm Two weeks long.
I wasn’t a wild child—not any more wild than the literal next, your girl. 
I just ran barefoot and collected, souvenir recyclables.
I was your sunshine, “born smiling,” born gay as a lark, your piano man, born to pound digits into keys with Floral secrets.
You wanted something more.
You got a dark horse candidate, a moralist chameleon. You, scientists, of & science kitchen of kitchen and garden
Hold fast to automaton creeds, or follow me.
Now that I am gone hear my love songs to my safe house.
Desert roses of stem and crystal.
Your children desert roses, one crystal rock, one succulent.
When from start, you wish for el nino, you got no rain.
Take it on yourself, or blame a chemical.
No rain precipitates wildfire.
El nino The Boy hides the sun all October.
Writing Assignment 5
The dream of a future outside
Love poem as Out
you didn’t unfriend ; you were out / and reached so to me. 
out to your parents / before you were , & still wonder what it / would’ve been like to tell you sooner – / the fear, the secrecy – the heat of evening / light through double windows on your basement porch . or , before , in your / old house , in the cool cave of your room , / at your door , knocking . a door tiled with / wood like your floor , your face was with stone.
Love poem as mixer
Am I only a prescription drug away from / the man I wish I were ? from responsibility . / from focus & concentration , from an open heart / & contemplation ? no natural way to talk / about this when you’ve detained yourself / for a month . staples out , sun out , birds out / splashing aletheia – the heart of the matter / He is the αλεθεια , the heart of my matter.
So he says . and so I’d like to try.
THE DREAM OF A FUTURE OUTSIDE
Writing Assignment 6
My poems
after james
i think i spend
far too much.
my metaphors
burn a hole in my pocket
(not my metaphor—
i had to borrow this one
since i hit my quota
this afternoon
telling another boy
he was not bad)
i spend my metaphors
on boys
saving none
for my poems
all this economy
inescapable
i told one
i wanted him
to be a primary stakeholder
in me, this just
before..
you get the metaphor
You Get a Metaphor,
YOU GET A METAPHOR,
YoU aLL gEt MeTaPhOrS!
if you look under your seat
you will not find a metaphor
like i said
i spent all mine already
(a day ago i told someone
who would not call
a boy bad
that they had had
that this boy had been
a bad boyfriend)
there was no metaphor for this
it was just true.
i beat dead metaphorses
i flog them
i log them
i long for them:
the boys,
not the metaphors:
i get metaphors
by passive income:
time passes,
they come:
the metaphors,
not the boys:
except for one
but i’ve hit my boy quota too.
a sonnet crown for the coronavirus
April 2020 II. Cruelty
The blank poem blows away a second time
and I think / I ought to start writing / I guess
The white lizard clings to the porch banister / a mess
of dead bleeding heart leaves entangles them / the twine.
A small brown one has climbed the cloven chair next to mine,
& slipped under a gray checkered blanket— a test
of whether it’s warmer than the bright creeping up porch steps.
The black lizards only come onto the vine leaves at night.
From the knotted dead tree to the four-post column swings my hammock;
the wood creaks with every shift, its first constant the peel,
its second the cracking brick patio, its decor the spanish moss tinsel.
Under a baking pineapple bush we planted two days ago is a rock;
on it is written “free” like the wicker rocking chair in which I sit,
like the bleeding heart that scorches & freezes, as I let it.
The bleeding heart that scorches & freezes as I let it
uses its own bones to shield itself from the spring-summer sun
Cough into your elbow and wash your hands, and you can be done
worrying. what the vine wouldn’t do for a spigot.
That’s how it started. The air was like a yellow sky, a hint
even before the smell of rain or the weight of the wind of the storm to come
had even arrived— the kind of storm that catches you without an um-
brella. We tried to plant hollyhock in our garden, saving the mint,
kale, and carrot seeds for later, though now we wonder if seeds expire,
if there’s a date that the potential for upward growth is outweighed
by prolonged heat or prolonged storm. As the front moves, Sarah is made
slippery; chronic pain swelling as her joints do. For her, there’s a higher
place, well two— one on earth and one above. Out west, in the moun-
tains, she will stretch and hike, and in heaven the war’s already been won.
Maddie says we shouldn’t stress / in heaven, she says, the war’s already been won
the cicadas scream otherwise / their siren warning, warning, loud even over the motorboats
of Florida summer / the nurse heeds them, writes a handbook / nightly mask bleach washes wrote
memory for troupes of teenagers / telling each other things / will be okay if they stay in the sun
incomplete data / complete disarray / believers sing a wish / to come undone
while I battle paper wasps and horseflies / songs and prayers aren’t what lay the poison moat
around my sleeping-place / and the perch from which I’m watching for the close
calls on the water / lake of endless potential emergencies / canoes, water snakes, any bacterium
every plague is a transfer of energy / a forced meditation on connectivity, contact
but plague does not always belie a war / conflict a secret enemy beneath the fabric of the universe
persecution is not found in a difference of opinion / or in accountability for a liturgy of hurts
shouldn’t she have known that? of course—and of course not / ‘should have seen’ and ‘couldn’t have’
meet at a concussive blow to the neck of a Black child / whistle blows thrice for emergency action
it becomes my duty to bring him to shore / to direct all witnesses’ movement in a single direction
it’s always been my duty even before to direct my eyes towards movements to take direction
a lineage of counselors that have come before to see a child who’s running away, to negotiate detente
and return them to the fold that was before I saw the child was my grandparents, them flaunt-
ing a mammy doll in the corner of a hallway where before I used to dance in Narnia pijamas reinspection
of childhood opens a Bible where after the Civil War ended, the Coachman family registry had a section
for the names of enslaved people. after papa says the quiet part out loud, my mother and my aunts
scold him, but mimi says nothing after some time she posts it on Facebook instead: HERE IS ALL I WANT
it reads: a chain post, like a prayer she sent to end the pandemic afterwards she backpedals at my objection
when a child runs from conflict, counselors pursue them when kids lash out, counselors take the blow
when i pursue my grandparents, their shells close around them am i to counsel them or cancel them?
i have no home to send them: Limbaugh runs the linoleum kitchen, Carlson owns the green-carpeted den
my sister takes to the streets at camp, I try to bridge homeschoolers and Eagle Lake kids, propose
a view through the eyes of Jesus himself killed unjustly, himself faultless in his death, himself an obit
that would change world’s weight himself spun into fool’s gold narratives, three-syllable counterfeight.
has it changed, gold’s weight? why, then, the 24-hour reckless spin of FeS2 around 3-syllable counterweights
meant 2 begin accounting 4 3 centuries of debt? each 1,000,000,000,000th dollar is rent from the feet of the poor,
from the CO2 and O3, from the 4merly worth 3 5ths people, from 18,000,000 people reduced 2 1 single “Native Lore”
merit badge in the Boy Scouts of America. in place of resti2tion, 13 stripes times 3 at the hands of white hate
and 2 the 2ne of [ , , , , ] bullets. it had to happen badly here— 2 many opinions decided our f8, 2 w8
so they could squeeze 1 last $ out of the summer. & even then 100s of decisions were passed on, 4 there’re wars
2 deadly not 2 profit from. “Super-spreader”: 1 p8ient responsible for spreading infection 2 many people more.
we w1dered 4 3 days if 5 fish had died because 2 boys with COVID-19 had kissed them. from 10 2 14 days l8r
we’d weeded out who’d gotten it, who’s doorframes or masks the angel of death’d pass’d o’er, a conspicuous few.
“Survivor’s guilt”: as you watch your family survive, but not others’, and your friends sicken, but not yourself—
you 1der what bargain God struck 2 quarantine you at summer camp, & 2 feel wrong 4 thankfulness as shelves
of re-restocked paper goods clear 4 the umpth time. 2 be glad 2 w8 in your car outside an UrgentCare drivethru
because it’s “just” an irregular heartbeat. what was tr8ed? am i a tr8or for living to 22? back in 2016 2020 didn’t
feel possible. the numbers 2 far away, flying cars away. we drove 20 mi, 30 min, with no guarantee of test kits.
I feel __ the possibilities. __ miles away, no flying or cars; we walked __ miles, __ days, with our mess kits.
The __ morning on the Trail, we saw the __ of hills we were due to climb and gagued how __ it’d take.
__ of the steps, I pressed with intention into my __ feet, chanting hope in my head, till we hit the __ peak.
on __ descent, my nerves relished in the drop, hoping the __ would never end; I didn’t want to jinx it,
so I kept myself from admitting the __ out loud, from repeating the count to myself, a song of worship
that wouldn’t __, a key change __ and __ chorus instead of a __. my legs a drummer pounding __
into the mountains, from whose sweat streams of __ originate. we gave ourselves __ names to shape
our story out of, to remember our __ time. it would rain, and we’d run to our bags to sleep.
After this __ episode on a __ trail, I moved to my life’s frontier, a __ house in the __ woods
where I read __ books to remind me there are __ kinds of death hidden by __ hush
and wrote __ poems to the __ cardboard stashed the __ bedroom and a high-school crush.
Desperate for change I can control, I develop a __ habit of walking the neighborhood.
I wonder if things will get __, but __ I can do is speak to the windows and fashion
a __ wonder for myself here, in a __ state __ of mosquitoes and __-time religion.

Introduction
The book from which this essay derives its title and
structure is probably exactly what you think it is.
Do You Thirst for God?
“Like a deer pants for streams of water, so my soul longs after you.” (Psalm 42) Being a person of faith in the postmodern, post-neoliberal era. A Gordian Knot? Deconstruction: the sword of Alexander? Reconstruction: the aftermath? – A refusal to migrate beliefs in the face of destruction.
A defiance of both the e- and the ex-vangelical.
“EL” – a name for God; Beth(el): house of god.
“Body is a temple, of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom you received.” (1 Cor 6) He bodied that.
Are You Governed Increasingly by God’s Word?
“I open my mouth and pant, longing for your commandments.” (Psalm 119) Being a part of a transformational project—radical wealth redistribution or neocolonial? Even my father admits it’s a little bit Marxist to ask for money from white conservative Christians and spend it on free food for a dozen Nicaraguan cities.
“Truly, I say to you, there is no one who has not left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or lands…” (Mark 10) But...
whose house, and what land?
Are You More Loving?
“To love your neighbor as yourself is more important than all burnt offerings and sacrifices.” (Mark 12) Being a person who wishes to love, who was carefully taught not to love certain persons certain ways (“Anyone who looks at a woman lustfully…”, Matthew 5), and didn’t.
Whose hands, hours after swim time at summer camp, feigned the motions of obedience (“If your eye causes you to stumble…” Mark 9).
I have to ask: am I allowed to answer this question, honestly? “—the Spirit of Truth.
The world cannot accept him.” (John 14) Yeah, I think I am more loving.
More than plenty of people.
What a shot to the heart: This should’ve been the first question.
Truly, truly, I say, it is easier to measure the progress of love towards a loved one than it is toward a stranger.
“The greatest of these is love.” (1 Corinthians 13 + a billion plywood plaques) Scripture, adapted into vaguely dystopic worship- music videos.
Tell me not to love someone, some thing, some way.
I will find another.
Every time.
Are You More Sensitive to God’s Presence?
“Where can I go from your Spirit? Where can I flee from your presence?” (Psalm 139): a seventh-grade Bible- memory challenge.
We do it for grades and points.
A monthly newsletter reports our activities, scrubbed perfect for the White churches keeping our budget at 89%.
“You whitewashed tombs!” (Matthew 23) Nothing about the surveillance I leveled upon my sister, how I told her I was “training” her.
Pre-online Millennial hyper-vulnerability culture.
One casts being ‘sensitive’ goodly, but now: how to untrain Truman Show God’s camera, that red flashing light, from the back of my head?
Do You Have a Growing Concern for the Spiritual and Temporal Needs of Others?
“So what do people get for all their hard work and anxiety?” (Ecclesiastes 2) Turns in roads treated as forks.
Does a body deserve care? What juxtaposition, part two: Spiritual vs.
Temporal.
Existential vs.
Time-bound.
Meaning vs.
Fate.
Interpretation vs.
Doom.
A summer choice, every year between two benedictions.
“What does the Lord require of you?” (Micah 6) Choice 1) Fly 1000 miles “to love and serve the Lord.” Choice 2) Join the folks, entering homes with people who left their homes to ly 1000 miles “to love and serve the Lord.” The advantage we take of hospitality.
We call these “Teams.” What are Love and Service? “He has shown you what is good.” (Micah 6) A smug, wry equivalence from your speaker, sarcastic.
Love and Service are painting walls, singing in a language you don’t know, free candy.
The flipbook you use to show your American- dream house to a woman who scavenged plastic kiddie pool walls to make her own home.
In the 1950s, “Teams” were called “Crusades.” “Does not wisdom call out? Does not understanding raise her voice?”(Proverbs 8) We lack different things.
We learn different lessons in different orders.
Here, on a mission, you learn you are White.
I watch my sister sort acetaminophen by the dozen.
Do You Delight in the Bride of Jesus Christ?
“Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth!” (Song of Solomon 1) Isn’t it kinda gay that I’m gonna marry Jesus? (I know; I’m not the first to make this joke.
The mystics, those poets, they get it.
“Batter my heart, three-person’d God.” (Donne)) That’s not the question.
Bride in question (Bridezilla, iykyk), is “the” Church.
The first front tooth lost in a blue-carpeted basement.
The dark room, Veggietales.
A puppet show.
Elaborate Vacation Bible Schools pre-ordered from Concordia Supply, held up in customs.
Again, ends and means—a bribe, the “holy one, a messenger, coming down from heaven.” (Daniel 4) A thunderstorm on two panes of zinc roofing.
A competition in drowning between it and a mic and speaker system.
“The rain came down…and the winds blew and beat against that house.” (Matthew 7) Every verse prophecy, every past present.
Is a church a church if it has a drum kit instead of a choir? Is a church a church if it’s a school instead? Is a church a church if the pews are plastic chairs? “Where two or three gather in my name...” (Matthew 18) A hundred boys named Jesus, and it’s not weird unless you make it weird.
(They always make it weird.) This is a Jeremiad.
The thunderstorms are tears, and the thunder angels bowling.
The lightning: Jesus’s camera flashing—again He is watching.
Do I delight in a
man who tells my father the only Bible inspired by God is in English, and we may not use another? Do I delight in knowing my father’s sermons by heart? They go like this:
Are the Spiritual Disciplines Increasingly Important to You?
Setting: Outside of time, or circa 3200 years ago.

An apparition to a man, doomscrolling.
A Calling and a Rejection (Steps 2 & 3 in the Hero’s Journey).
Our 2nd & 3rd family Bibles come from England, from old- language translators.
God is a Lion, or God made the world with Song.
Children, or children-sized adults, make a difference.
“Tell it to your children, and let your children tell it to their children, and their children to the next generation.” (Joel 1)
A SIGN.
A SIGN.
A SIGN.
A SIGN.
“Some spiritual gift to make you strong—” (Romans 1) Jars of Clay, clashing, crashing trumpets: the triumph of this sermon and an alt-rock band my father sewed into the helix of my ear.
My mother speaks to women—because here we gender the testimony of God— “Want to stay, willing to go, or willing to stay, want to go?” So we pack up our fleeces.
My favorite judge was left-handed, like me.
The Word from God was a sword, lost in my belly.
Do You Still Grieve over Sin?
“Have I not wept for those in trouble? Has my soul not grieved for the needy?” (Job 30) Sin, the first act I learned after my existence.
Meaning: missing the mark—for all our good intentions, we all have bad aim.
It’s on page 2 (Genesis 3) Jesus cried a bunch; did you know that? He wept and bellowed with anger at Lazarus’s tomb.
I wasn’t taught to do that.
Which Commandment is it that demands from me composure?
Are You a Quicker Forgiver?
It’s a literary-size math problem: 70 x 7 = rhetorical hyperbole.
A T-shirt company devotes itself to brand parodies—a game director owns each of them.
In red: “Ketchup With Jesus,” in blue: “Mayo Light Shine.” (Matthew 5) Jonah, the original Moby Dick, Prophet of the LordTM, was furious with God for his forgiveness.
“I knew you were gracious and compassionate, slow to anger, abounding in loving devotion.” (Jonah 4) It is a literary- size conflict: Man, orgive Man.
Man, orgive Society.
Man, forgive Self.
Man, forgive God.
I forgave myself in a hedge maze, a drizzle on the page in salt and freshwater.
Reading that holy Book, running along the same wall looking for the Door.
Do You Yearn for Heaven and to Be with Jesus?
“The Son of Man has no place to lay his head.”(Matthew 8) To my sister, our pasts are behind us.
She will not be called “missionary kid.” She has translated enough empty promises, waved for cameras.
She’s done being petted for being blonde and a darling Christian daughter.
But prophecy is written present tense.
I want you to ask me about me.
I watch her now.
I watch me now: This essay is a Biblically-accurate angel.
Trodding door-to-door down dirt cobble road past wood-post fences, like groups of Whites panhandling the Spirit in broken language.
After listening, women go back to sweeping the hard ground free of its dust.
I am apophatic: Heaven is not a cloud.
I am cataphatic: It is a city.
I am syllogistic: If there are trees and rivers and clothes in that heavenly city, that kingdom of glass and gates, won’t I have a body? “Let the one who is thirsty come, and let the one who desires the water of life drink freely.” (Revelation 22) Given there is no temple, sun, moon, closed gates, or tears, tell me, too, no money.
But to answer the question: of course.
(Hebrews 11) of course.
(2 Corinthians 5) of course.
(Psalm 61) of course.(Philippians 1) Could I go now?
article in a post-calamity trade journal OR training program script for post-calamity office newbs
Watercoolers sit on concrete bases along open walls, many blank ceramic or carpet tiles around them, so that they may particpate centrally to the mechanisms of life.
This is not a romance; watercoolers are no natural springs.
Watercoolers are false springs, and every seventh day when the water men arrive in their truck with the 25-gallon barrels of water from the spring, watercoolers hum with excitement, hoping they might be taken along with their spent, empty jugs to the real source, the real tap.
A watercooler knows that it is a facsimile of something living, and so it delights
when, instead of lifting the blue tab for cool water, a young boy accidentally lifts the red tab— in that moment when a splash of scalding water burns his small finger,
latched over the lip of the styrofoam cup (the cup can take it), and he winces.
A watercooler laughs to itself, for these are the only moments it has to feel like it has made a real choice— when a mistake is made.
Watercoolers begrudge isolation, along blank walls, facing a wide open floor,
as mirages of oases, puddles, really—puddles that dribble from their palsied lips, dispenser drip trays— they wish they were in corners, half-hugged by concrete, where secrets might be whispered.
Watercoolers do not know that secrets are shared around them, so they treats what is secret as common knowledge, and what is alive as mystic, and believe themselves agnostics.
A watercooler has a 28-page user manual that lists Energy-star certifications, which no one cares about.
A watercooler is subject to supply-chain disruptions: no one notices a watercooler until it has run out of water, when they shout and kick and rattle, tip, hoping
for a few droplets—and gosh, does it try to kick back— but it has been empty for months now.
Watercoolers, with their many parts made of metal and plastic, will dissolve one day, heaped onto rubble, or flooded by what they couldn’t ever make for themselves.
Watercoolers only bring joy to those who have no use for them—babies delighted by the deep burble of air lifting into the bottle jug, or passers-by who see a watercooler wherever they are, but don’t have to stay.
i have been angry with a tech bro I am angry with tech bros
tech bros are ruining america
we already have known what we are you can stop pretending now
in the Lord of the Rings, a way too thinly veiled allegory of the second world war, Sauron, whose minions (corrupted elves called orcs & corrupted men called wraiths) speak an invented pastiche of German called Blackspeak, communicates with a second tower across the world with a wizard who went bad, who, as a stand-in for Japan, is named Saruman, via a crystal ball (the chief steward of Gondor aslo has one, and listens in, and is also corrupted) called a PALANTIR.
PALANTIR TECHNOLOGIES was founded by a computer scientist, Stephen Cohen, & billionaire Peter Thiel.
the company specializes in “big data analytics.” its stocks trade at about $25, & it employs 2500 people.
it’s based in Denver.
PALANTIR TECHNOLOGIES is used at the south border of the United States with Mexico.
as Sauron used the PALANTIR to surveil the kingdom of Gondor, PALANTIR TECHNOLOGIES surveils migrants & aids ICE in capturing undocumented persons & children.
blood & soil & water & code
soot & sediment & paint & smudge spill & smear & dribble & soak paste & obscure & trace & fog follow & stain & crimson & murk
puddle dry & illuminated, hung.
frame
& dangle string & slap & rebar & screw
there is one sword Sauron fears-- ANDURIL.
“Flame of the West.” a symbol of the lineage of male rulers, of kings.
i have not yet mentioned that Mordor, where Sauron lives, lies in the east,
and is allied with another eastern force called the Haradrim, who ride elephants, & a pirate army.
they are slaughtered by a norse-like medieval ghost army at the battle of pelennor fields and Aragorn, heir to the throne, wielding ANDURIL.
ANDURIL INDUSTRIES was founded in 2017 by the “22nd richest entrepreneur under 40,” Palmer Luckey, who designed Facebook- owned virtual reality technology device & company Oculus.
ANDURIL INDUSTRIES supplies autonomous drones and surveillance towers to the United States Air Force and Department of Homeland Security.
The Altius-700, unveiled yesterday, can carry 300% more electronic warfare & munitions than the 600, and disable “adversary systems...
with lethal and nonlethal effects,” and ANDURIL is “proud to continue innovating the future of ‘air launched effects.’”
all Sauron has is 9 dragons called Nazgul.they shriek like missiles, deafening people and inspiring despair.
if only Sauron had a better initial public offering on the
Gondor Stock Exchange and a more well-rounded social media marketing team, and if the wraiths wore Patagonia, instead of hooded cloaks, the coalition of the Good wouldn’t have sought to defeat him.
if only Sauron had better lobbyists at the FCC & the SEC & the Senate Armed Forces Committee.
bottles & dirt & shoes bottles & shoes
and a green box around your body marked as you walk the desert
-- person 348
hugs & masks & flags & backpacks
loaded with threats from your hometown to prove to the asylum committee
your existence here is justified
and a green frame around your face as you stand in front of the camera
-- person 566
the eyes are 100,000 cameras
the eyes are in the back of ICE’s head
paint rivers in the color of your choosing your country chooses petroleum brown, source code green, & crimson red.
ABSTRACT
The idea of “missions” and “missionaries,” or the individual response of a person to Jesus’ command for Christian evangelism, carries differing cultural connotations.
On one hand, it has been reflected upon as a European-American project of colonization, and on the other, it’s revered among Evangelical circles as one of the most noble of Christian commitments.
What is less talked about are the children of missionaries: the “missionary kids” and their experience of the “mission field” not as a “harvest field” for bringing souls into relationship with Jesus, but as a first or second home.
“MKs” either imbibe their parents’ sense of duty and mission, leave that life behind, or remain torn between their country of origin and the country they are raised in.
This thesis contains the beginning chapters of a much longer project in essays, poems, and multimedia that detail aspects of roughly twelve years of my life as the MK of Baptist Missionaries to Managua, Nicaragua.
The scope of this project is limited to the years leading to my graduation from high school in 2016, with brief mention of the civil-political crisis in 2018, but the project’s structure, which adheres to themes found in each of the first seven books of the Bible, allows for future revision and expansion.
A NOTE ON STRUCTURE
Hi.
I’m P.D.; I grew up in a Baptist missionary family.
I still am a Christian, and my present understanding and experience of Christian religion is unique from that of my parents and grandparents.
This year, the thematic structure of the Protestant Christian Bible became evident as a willing structure to theme the following essays when I began reading Robert Alter’s (Prof.
Emeritus, UC Berkeley) translation of the Hebrew Bible.
It’s for this reason that the headings for each section of this project are subtitled in canon Bible publication order.
These subtitles are not meant to be held too closely to the essays.
No one-to-one can be made for every story in the first 50 chapters of Genesis, but the themes of Genesis—the sense for family and genealogy, the narrative parallels of the Abrahamic family’s calling and emigration(s), the idea of Beginning, and so on—are fruitful reference points for readers.
And so on.
Currently, this project includes Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, The Book of Joshua, and The Book of Judges.
I intend for this project to expand, for my essays on missionary kid life to fill the Old Testament.
Because you don’t stop being an MK after you move back to the United States (if only it were that easy), I intend to compose essays on my personal and spiritual development after high school to fill out the New Testament books as well.
1
It’s the start of things, morning in Serranías.
HOW WE CAME TO BE MISSIONARIES, or GENESIS
Humidity drapes the trees and grass and vines— ribbons of wet air slip through green iron gates and curl around their heavy lock and chains,
dew sweating like the two children sitting outside, on a ledge, waiting for
a car: the cool of the day.
Some of my earliest memories are of the outdoors.
Though I was born into a home on a street called Sweetwater, the first house I remember was next to my grandparents, in front of a four-acre orange grove they owned in Lakeland, Florida.
It was Florida in every sense: a big retention pond might home a gator; endangered species of gopher tortoises trudged through the patchy, sandy grass onto the property from the pine scrub forest behind an orange grove.
My mom’s parents, Mimi and Papa Coachman, are legacy Florida folks: Mimi had grown up in Pensacola, and the Coachmans had been a pioneer family of Clearwater, Florida.
The historic Coachman log cabin stands next to a site marker near to the city, and both a housing development and a park downtown bears their name.
I was the sixth Floridian generation, though my mom had married into the Edgars, whose roots were north in Wisconsin but tangled up into California and Florida by the Marine Corps.
The house on Lakeland Highlands Road was down a slope from the road itself.
My sister, my three cousins, and I would carry our tricycles and bicycles with training wheels from the garage almost to the mailbox at the top of the hill, and let gravity carry us down, faster and faster, until we fell off the opposite edge of the driveway, tumbling into the tall, spiky cushion of St.
Augustine grass.
One year for Christmas, I received a motorized Jeep, which I drove from our house through three rows of orange trees over to Mimi and Papa’s screened-in pool deck.
I had one of my early birthdays, dinosaur-themed, there.
We prayed before eating the cake, a layered actively-erupting volcano.
Figure 1.
The House by the Grove.
1 The beginnings of religion are deep poem, ancient philosophy; the cadence of the past is darkened looking-glass.
2 To start my genealogy, I list my biological premises, fathers; the names of my mothers unwither.
3 As a child, I memorized;
as a child, I could recite
4 where faith comes from, and what it is;
who faith comes from, and the circumstances of his birth.
5 Once I spoke to this child, on the floor with his nebulizer; he struggled to breathe the spirit of God.
6 I told him perfection was moot, now;
his soft answer turned away my wrath.
7 By day I meditated on the spiritual abecedarian,
At night my mind filled in the initials of distilled epistles.
8 After I struck my sister with my red bunkbed’s metal ladder,
I was bent over my father’s knee and struck, blushing tears.
9 I solidify my story from testimonial into proclamation; I remember I am named after no apostle.
10 My name is of a boy afraid to be a man;
he fights with his mind but not with his hands.
11 If I say that I am taking this all down in sequence, I lie, Or, I am deceiving myself.
12 If I claim I am never wrong, the truth is not in me, Or I am not practicing the truth.
13 Where can I learn to love with all of me?
Where could I escape this question’s answer?
14 I pray over the memory of this house; my writing is its living home.
Papa Coachman is a hard-stomached, gray-haired man of “War Between the States” stock who named my mother’s childhood dogs “Dixie” and “Rebel,” who grew up in a well-to-do, Greek life, die-hard Florida State family.
His parents worked the Coachman Label orange company packing house, and he brokered the transportation of oranges across the country well past regular retirement age.
Mimi Coachman, whose biological father was a WWII pilot KIA, has short, curled, wispy gray hair.
She became an interior design student at Florida State and, after Papa’s first wife took Jon and Maggie to Houston without him, she married him.
My Grandma Edgar, on the other hand, has strawberry-blonde hair she kept in curlers overnight and then permed as she got older.
She was a military wife, and raised her five children mostly on her own, while Grandpa was deployed in Korea, Rome, and Vietnam, and was widowed shortly after her youngest, my father, graduated from college.
There are some generational similarities between the two sides of my family, though they speak little to each other except at family events.
Both Papa and Grandma grew up on farms, and both Mimi and Grandma are named Jan.
They all three go to church, but separately—Papa to an Episcopal church (in which he was raised, and which, he never fails to remind me, has the
third-best pipe organ in the state), Mimi to a Presbyterian (the theologically conservative type), Grandma to an independent Baptist.
My parents call our family “Baptiterian,” partially in jest (what a scandal it was to Mimi that my mom would marry a Baptist), but also because Heritage Baptist Church, as many independent Baptist churches are, have almost identical understandings of faith as the Presbyterians; they just reserve the sacrament of baptism for “believing,”
self-identified Christians, instead of babies.
This may seem like a semantic formality, but at some point in the past those differences may have been matters of life and death.
The other difference
between these two sides of the family is whether alcohol will be at Christmas and Easter lunches—my Grandma quit when she converted in her early 40s.
These differences also matter because the Baptist church is devoted to evangelism.
Besides the big command that Jesus gives to people, “repent and believe” (Mark 1:15), there’s a second major command that Baptists and similar denominations take extremely seriously: “Go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them” (Matthew 28:19).
There are some, like Mom and Dad, who believe that the conditions of this claim rest mainly on Jesus' authority, but there’s also strains of people who believe that the “End Times” will only come to pass once every language group has been reached by Christianity.
According to their worldview, this is true and logical.
The sorts of evangelical Protestants who choose to leave their countries to evangelize in others are called “missionaries.” Protestants also leave in as singles or in family units, not in pairs of single men, as Mormon missionaries do (and again, in the eyes of the Evangelicals, Mormons have no Gospel to preach, because they don’t believe in the total salvation of Jesus’ death and resurrection, but rather in salvation by utter obedience to God’s word).
•••
Heritage Baptist has a large, blue carpeted sanctuary building with four columns of 20-foot-long, blue upholstered pews, which have filled steadily during the 25 years my family
has attended.
The building has a small foyer that faces west, and on its south wall is a collection of framed photographs of different missionary families that the church supports financially.
Each of these photographs comes in one of two types:
The Headshot.
The general form.
A family photo is taken in front of a lush garden background, in front of a Christmas tree, or cropped in front of a stock landscape with the family name and arrangement of the children.
Sometimes, there’s a pet.
The Prayer Card.
The handout.
Still the family photo, but with some added media: the name of a country, or a city, and a small world map, maybe even a map of the nation that that family is going to be missionaries in.
The names of the family are on there, but so is a description of what that family is doing overseas: pastor training, or teaching.
Street evangelism, relief work, or house church.
It might even have a tear-off to mail in a financial support commitment.
Mimi and Papa have a couple of prayer cards on their fridge, and Grandma has her own wall of prayer cards on a corkboard over her writing desk at home.
Those missionaries, though many are international, sometimes stay home in the United States, and work at Bible camps around the country, or in the home offices of sending missions agencies, which handle logistics, financing, training, and legal support for missionaries when they’re on the field.
There’s one prayer card that the fridge, the corkboard, and the foyer all share, and that’s my parents’.
They’ve changed over the years, as our family has aged.
My Mimi and Papa have the photos of me and my sister in high school.
My grandma still has our original card, from when I was eight and my mom wore a long bob.
Our cut-out family four: my dad Bruce, my mom Laura, my sister Emma, and me, Peter, all captioned, stand “in front” of a long view: a yellow field, a lake, mountains in back.
2
There’s land for the toil outside of Ciudad Sandino.
Across Lake Managua to the north and in the logo
of a front gate sign, Momotombito fronts a volcano band, her sister Momotombo whispers smoke, dribbles fire incontinent black down her green back every century.
Sulfur blends into the clouds that drool westward off her lip.
When my parents first decided to become missionaries, they developed a story of themselves that I learned almost by heart.
This story, to evangelicals, is called the “testimony”— a story of how someone came into relationship with God, especially into a sense of calling to ministry.
A testimony could start anywhere in someone’s life, depending on when they were “saved” (turned away from self-centeredness towards God-centeredness, or ABC: Admit you’re a sinner, Believe that Jesus died for your sins and was raised to life again, Confess Jesus as Lord of your life).
Some testimonies get wild, like Chuck Colson, who served prison time for his involvement in the Watergate scandal before he converted, was ‘saved’ in jail and became a prominent Christian scholar, writer, and curriculum developer (my high school Bible class took his WorldView course with Saddleback [mega]Church pastor Rick Warren over DVD).
Others involve drug and alcohol abuse or a deal with God: in Tuscaloosa, where I went to grad school, there’s a man who stands in front of a Bojangles on an intersection corner six days a week with a “Jesus Will Save You” poster because he made a promise to serve God if his cancer was healed.
My parents’ testimonies are pretty straightforward.
To make a short story long, my parents tie in their salvation with their marriage to one another, their call to ministry, and a good deal of exposition.
I can imagine them telling this story over and over again.
•••
My dad stands to the left of our display table.
He’s six feet tall and stands with his arms crossed, protectively, leaning back on his heels as he releases small anecdotes, a bit at a time.
He’s got hair trimmed short on the sides, and a little bit longer on top, that he combs over.
It’s gotten thinner over time, but he’s had the bald spot on his crown since I was a kid.
He stays clean-shaven at my mom’s direction, even though she lets him do the first two weeks of
No-Shave November each year.
He’s not a narrative storyteller like my mom, but parleys in
trivia that adds up.
Over the course of a weekend, you would piece together how he got to where you were.
My dad had been in the marines, he said; as a kid I wanted to join, like my brother, and shoot Nazis and fly planes.
Later, he might divulge, it was my mom who took me to church, and she was really involved.
Grandma’s name is on Heritage Baptist’s charter and constitution.
Dad got involved in summer camp ministry from high school through college, when he got his teaching degree.
At Camp Gilead, the Bible camp outside of Lakeland, the two women who ran the camp foregrounded the stories of missionaries and hosted them to give lessons weekday mornings.
I read a lot of those missionary biographies, which we still have on our bookshelves in English and Spanish at home, of people like Jim Elliott (who was martyred in the Amazon rainforest by an indigenous South American tribe his widow later returned to continue missionary work with) and Hudson Taylor (a missionary to China).
Those missionaries, who lived between the early 1800s and middle 1900s, were teachers, translators, publishers, orphanage-founders, pilots, and martyrs.
Becoming more and more drawn to teaching, and away from military service, Dad went to college in Clearwater to study science education, and spent time fishing, snorkeling, and fossil hunting.
He had to pare down and give away some of his collection of whale bones, ammonites, and mammoth teeth when we moved, and the very back of our storage container still has milk crates filled with finds from the Peace River, the Grand Canyon, and Tampa Bay.
By the time we became a missionary family, Dad had finished a
low-residency Master’s in Biblical Studies from Dallas Theological Seminary.
The
missionary stories he had heard as a kid at camp, and the missionaries his mother, my Grandma, had hosted at home over the years had planted a seed.
•••
Or maybe we’re at a dinner table that belongs maybe to a pastor, or to a family hosting us in their guest rooms for the duration of our visit at this church.
Here, my mom is eye-level with everyone, even if while, sitting high on the dining room upholstery, her feet might not reach the ground.
I’m five-foot-one—with shoes on, she jokes.
She’s dressed modestly: in a shirt with a swooping, but not revealing neckline and an ultrathin-chain necklace, and either in light-wash pants or jeans that come down to the middle of her shins, or in a dress that comes down to the knee.
The tips of her dark-brown dyed, flat-ironed hair come to rest at her shoulders, the hair, parted at the top, frames her bright blue eyes that shine as she tells her story.
It starts in elementary school, in first or second grade, when her teacher helped her understand who Jesus was.
Then, when her family moved from Clearwater to Lakeland, she began attending the K-12 Christian school she and my father would later teach at.
In college, I heard a chapel speaker who asked us to search our hearts and ask God, “Am I wanting to stay in the United States, and willing to go to the mission field, or do I want to go to the mission field, but am willing to stay?” And it was then that my mom began to seriously angle her heart towards missionary work.
In college, my mom dated with ministry in mind.
(Her boyfriend, who was from Tuscaloosa, planned to be in Christian service.
This part of my mother’s testimony wasn’t in her pitch to churches; my sister and I only learned about this when we were older.
When they became engaged, though, he had a kind of existential crisis.
My grandparents weren’t fond of him, and it seemed like he had a crisis of purpose.
My mom still speaks kindly of him, even though she broke off
the engagement and moved home to Lakeland after college instead of marrying and moving to Alabama.
It’s here that my parent’s stories intertwine.
They both began teaching at Lakeland Christian; my mom taught second grade, and my dad taught science and Bible.
The extent of their relationship, at first, was collegial: Mom and Dad coached cheerleading and basketball, respectively.
At a game or meet of some kind, the teams conspired to set them up, and presented Dad with a gift certificate to a restaurant, maybe Bennigan’s?, that no longer stands in Lakeland with the name “Laura Coachman” on it.
Lakeland was a small town then, and my parents’ church communities overlapped with the Christian school, and everyone seemed to be in on the romance.
Here in the story, my parents might be on-stage at a church, sharing their joint testimony before the congregation.
They might look at each other as they take turns sharing what happened, passing a hand-held wireless microphone between them as they connected their stories together.
We didn’t like each other at first.
We didn’t use up the gift certificate, so we had to go back! But there wasn’t that spark there; we were just friends.
My mom: That summer, we went on separate missions trips.
I went to Ecuador, and explored the possibility of teaching as a single at the missionary school there, Alliance Academy.
Bruce went to Russia.
My dad: There was a lot of buzz at that time about missionaries and pastors going to Russia.
The Berlin Wall had just come down.
You know, I remember, we went to a summer camp with all of these pastors, and it was like, “D’oh!” because they were all in Speedos.
My mom: When we both got back from our missions trips, the Lord had worked on our hearts some, individually, and he asked me out! Then we went on our real first date: the first date we really liked each other.
Once,
Bruce sent flowers to my classroom, and half of the administration office came to the door to watch me open them and see who it was from.
They married soon after, and three years later they had me.
I was a summer baby, July, so my mom finished out the year teaching second grade.
Two years later, while my mom was remodeling the kitchen in their house on Sweetwater (Don’t come yet; I’m not done!) Emma was born, and soon after they moved into the home they rented from Mimi and Papa, on the orange grove.
To make a little extra money, my dad sometimes drove the school bus, and my mom turned to the early-2000s versions of the multi-level marketing business, Creative Memories scrapbooking and Pampered Chef cookware.
We used that money on Disney Florida Resident annual passes one year, back when they were affordable, and my mom scrapbooked all of the unique character signatures from Mickey and Minnie Mouse, Peter Pan and Captain Hook, the Princesses, and so on, with photographs of my sister Emma and me with them.
Soon after my parents moved in next to Mimi and Papa, they began taking what they felt was their call to missions seriously.
They went on missions trips together: Mom went to Russia with Dad.
My mom: When I did cheer, we would go to McDonald’s after every game, and I would get a Big Mac and fries.
I stopped because of a milkshake I had at the McDonald’s in Moscow just before our flight.
I was sick the whole way home! My parents started to look around for a way to engage full time with missions, at the encouragement of Rich & Yvonne, the missions pastor at our home church and his wife.
They were both tall, sharp people, and didn’t talk down to children.
They began touring with the Association of Baptists for World Evangelism to begin getting a sense to where they might serve as missionaries: Where God would have us
… Where God would lead us … Where there was a need, … Where there was a harvest field for missions … “The laborers are few, Matthew 9.” My parents
weren’t sure at first where God had called them to missions.
Their original two ideas, Ecuador and Russia, were on the table, and they began to explore other emerging fields, especially in Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and Mexico.
They took trips to these countries to check them out; meanwhile, Emma and I were home with a sitter.
She was one of my dad’s high school students, one of the students he would send from his classroom to pick me up from Kindergarten the next wing of the school over.
Because my nickname to her, as a small kid with a big head, was Sputnik, she was Sputnik Girl.
My mom put her second-grade teacher skills back into action: first to homeschool me through first grade, then to make ways for us to track the days until they returned home.
She stapled construction paper strips together in interlocking rings to make chains, one for each of the two of us, that hung from the wall.
Each day my parents were gone, Emma and I were allowed to remove one link from the chain and open the paper bag that was attached to it.
Inside were puzzle pieces, a few at a time, and maybe some chewing gum or soft candy like Tootsie Rolls.
I remember little of these days.
I felt informed, though, sure of what was told to me, that every explanation provided to me was true or would come true.
Even as a child, this kind of security—the security of information and promise—helped me roll with the change.
Because my parents are teachers, they understood that kids need structured stories to help them make sense of change, whether they’re big or temporary.
They didn’t brush me off or hesitate to try to answer when I asked questions, and they provided for me plenty of books with which to learn about the world I would grow up in, from Magic School Bus to a kids’ Science Encyclopedia to a 5-lb The History of the United States.
They called back home over the phone while they were gone, and as the chain links got smaller, and the puzzle pieces came together into depictions of puppy dogs and kittens, days getting closer and closer until they returned with a Revelation of their own.
Figure 2.
The Grove.
3
This land is kind-of promised; soft soil covers a hard dirt
that neem and mahogany roots cut through; a well pumps potable water from an aquifer
up a white pumice rock tunnel, porous but hard, making semi-olympic amounts of chlorinewater.
Tall grass grows to be baled,
but burns at a glance of flame.
My parents flew to Nicaragua with Rich and Yvonne to visit the ABWE missionaries there, Bev and Larry.
They were both tall: Larry was bald, with a large nose and a smile that connected like strings from the corners of his eyes to the corners of his mouth, and Bev was a soft, calm- smelling grandmotherly woman with shorter gray hair.
Like other missionaries we came to know on our team, the Smiths had been missionaries in Chile before arriving in Nicaragua, but had come to establish an ABWE presence there after the humanitarian disaster caused by Hurricane Mitch the year I was born, in 1998.
The Smiths were battle-hardened, in a way—they had planted a church in Chile and pastored it before, during, and after the Pinochet coup-d'etat and the subsequent dictatorship.
It was during their visit to Bev and Larry that my parents experienced what they might call “a clear sign” that God would have them come to Nicaragua as missionaries, not to Costa Rica, Peru, Mexico, or other places ABWE had missionaries.
•••
In the mid-2000s, a new movement in missions evangelism was occurring in the American Evangelical church.
At one point in time, especially in the early- to mid-Twentieth century, missions work could be divided into several categories:
Vocational: a doctor, nurse practitioner, teacher, dentist, or construction worker would arrive in a country to perform their work as usual, just as a Christian who would sometimes invite acquaintances to church or Bible study.
Pastoral: a pastor or missionary with a Bible degree feels called to start a church in a foreign country.
They start that church in their early- to mid-thirties, raise their family in that country, and retire from the church in their seventies or eighties having grown a communion from the ground-up: from Bible study to house church, from house church to rental space, to church property ownership, to expansion as the church grew.
Hopefully, by the time the pastor is ready to retire, a generation of church leaders has been developed that is ready to take over for the now-old pastor, and the burgeoning church has a celebratory goodbye ceremony where the pastor, his wife, and his family are all honored for their years of dedication and service to the preaching of God’s word in the city in which the church has purchased the property and raised up a major childrens’ education or feeding program.
Translational: For people whose language groups are “uncontacted,” like tribal communities in less-developed areas of the world, a couple of missionary couples will send their children to boarding school or to a missionary school in a nearby city or country while the parents, both trained in linguistics, make contact with a people group, learn to live their way, learn their language, and develop over a dozen years or so a script for that language, translating the Bible and teaching the people the written form of their “heart language” so that they can read it in their own tongue.
Sometimes, the Jesus film is dubbed over in the town’s native language as well, and shown on a large projector screen to the community.
Usually, the heart behind this is genuine—Bible translators believe against “civilizing” a people by teaching them a more dominant nearby language (like English, Mandarin, Hindi, or Spanish).
Their work in some ways guarantees the preservation of a language and a way for a people to keep records of their own story in the future.
At the same time, this technological intervention into the way of life of a people that hasn’t asked for it appears like a major invasion of privacy—and then, so again, sometimes so does missionary work in general.
What happened in the 2000s was that a new model of ministry was appearing.
Instead of deeply investing in American-to-local contact, missions agencies like my parents’ thought to start institutes for ministry, where leaders from already-established local churches in a country would come, post-seminary, for pastoral training.
And this was the situation in Nicaragua: a Baptist seminary had long been established, as well as a network of Baptist churches in Managua, and those churches were ready to begin spreading and planting daughter churches elsewhere around the country.
Dad, when he visited Bev and Larry with my mom, discussed getting plugged in as one of the Bible teachers in this organization.
But an Institute of Church Planters—as the program facilitated by ABWE missionaries came to be called (Instituto de Sembradores de Iglesias, in Spanish)—needed a home base.
The Smiths were on the hunt for a tract of land that could be developed into a retreat center, a kind of camp site, where church events could be held, where events could be rented out, where conferences could happen.
My dad had experience with that kind of land already: after all, he had grown up going to Bible camp in Polk City, right outside of Lakeland.
With many cabins, a chapel, a dining hall, and a lake, Camp Gilead was kind of a template that he could see applied to a place in Nicaragua.
It happened the week my parents visited that Bev and Larry were visiting a piece of land between Ciudad Sandino, on the outskirts of Managua, and Mateare, a town on the way to Leon.
It was large, grassy, and sunny, hot, with a view of Lake Managua and the two volcanoes on its edge.
A hundred and sixty acres available.
Just then, Larry got a call, my parents recall.
It was the ABWE home office.
Someone has just put up a donation for $200,000 to purchase that land, the caller said.
God had provided.
It seemed like that was our signal, that Nicaragua was where we were needed.
They took a photograph of themselves on the land, Momotombo in the
background, the plain laid out Soon, Centro ABEM (the ABWE Center, in Spanish) was purchased, and development began.
Figure 3.
Cosmology
after Philip Schaefer:
… A heavy kite // could touch Jupiter if Jupiter existed”
The year my dad quit working at the Christian high school, he packed his milk crates full of River fossils,
his shotgun, .22, his Luger pistol, and his Celtics jersey, into storage with the silverware, Mom’s wedding dress.
His whale bones, mammoth teeth, and ammonites
reviewed what was once flesh and bone but now’s just rock.
“Millions of fossils / buried in rock layers laid down by water / all over the earth”
Meanwhile, I laid out a six-foot long, two-foot wide puzzle of the solar system, forty-eight jumbo-sized pieces,
a twelfth of the sun on the left, Pluto on the right (at this point we believed in Pluto’s planetness).
Except in my encyclopedia, I was taught from Sunday to Friday
that it takes God only as long as I to make, assemble, and pack up it all.
The first item constructed was a huge swimming pool, tiled and paved around.
Whether the Center had cabins or not, or even a place to sit outside of the sun, it was thought that a swimming pool would be the draw.
Plans had been drawn up for cabins, sports fields, offices, and so on, a master plan, one that was held onto for years, and partially, bit by bit, though amended, fulfilled.
The pool had a second major draw besides recreation —baptism.
It was a fitting statement for the denomination, to that first call Jesus made 2000 years ago, that this specific call should be completed before one even had a place to sleep, because even Jesus, it’s said, had no such thing during his ministry.
The first cabin was built, though, soon after, as were bunkbeds, on the side of a hill overlooking the swimming pool.
My grandma, at seventy, went on this mission trip, with other men and women who are prominent at Heritage Baptist now and with Mom and Dad to help in the construction before we moved there full time.
Construction for World Evangelism, which by logistically-anal protocol ships an entire three-weeks worth of food in a shipping container to the locations where they perform ministry by construction, erected a seminary building with offices and storage space at the top of the hill.
Then, a long, open dining hall went up, with a full kitchen, then some more cabins.
4
There’s a pivot point, a bet on the day the sky will open.
Stormwaters could come midday or overnight to pierce a heavyhot cloudblanket that climbs the hills of Nejapa.
Like the image of a broken waterbed, there’s the mind,
which knows what could happen; then there’s happening.
Lay planks onto the stream.
Know you’ll soak your shoes.
It requires a significant amount of money and preparation to become a missionary.
When my parents decided to join ABWE, they were onboarded in a pre-service training and began selling or packing up all of their belongings, gave away the goats that lived in our field, moved out of the house next to Mimi and Papa, and moved into a small home owned by our home church, which we called “the Mission House.” I traded my old room, with its green shag carpet, for a new bedroom, which had a navy blue short carpet and navy blue twin beds, and red, white, and blue trim around the top of the eggshell-colored walls.
And Mom and Dad had to begin fundraising.
If you become a missionary in a more hierarchical denomination, like the Presbyterian, the Southern Baptist, or the Methodist Churches, the funding your family needs to move abroad is kind of built-in, because you join a sending agency that’s sanctioned and funded automatically by the denomination, by each of the individual member churches.
As independent Baptists, my family had to fundraise from individual Baptist churches and individual supporters, who pledged a monthly amount of support.
This process was called pre-Field, because the place you would move as a missionary was called the Field, and it continued for about a year until we reached a living salary, which budgeted for living, savings and retirement, education, insurance, and ministry funds, each in marked accounts.
When we came back to the United States every so often to do more fundraising, called “Furlough,” we revisited our “supporting churches” to give updates and maintain in-person relationships with pastors and church members.
My mom used to help us understand where our fundraising was at with a thermometer marker like other fundraisers do, and later, when we were older and talking about prayer requests at the dinner table, she would speak in percents.
We didn’t often lose supporters (we did, but it seems like
other missionaries had it worse than us), even when the financial crisis happened the year after we moved.
Instead, costs would rise—insurance, education, travel budgets, and so on.
When I was six or seven, we spent many weekends touring central and south Florida in our green Izuzu Rodeo, giving the same presentation in different churches.
We presented at women’s groups, at luncheons, during Sunday service, and at our display table in other carpeted foyers, next to the gospel tract displays.
The big event that churches have is called a “missions conference.” Over the course of a weekend, there would be church services and communal dinners on Friday night, Saturday night, and Sunday morning, with breakfasts, luncheons, and events throughout the day.
At any of these, one of the attending missionaries would deliver some sort of speech, sermon, or presentation to communicate the world’s need for Baptist churches and Bibles in places other than the USA.
Sometimes, the missionaries would make a call to action, inviting individuals who felt “led” or “called” by the Holy Spirit to answer God’s leading; usually, they communicated their own story of “the call” and invited church members to partner with the ministry by prayer and financial gifts.
It was at these missions conferences that I first began to learn how to use Microsoft PowerPoint, on a fifteen-pound laptop that my dad took with us from church to church.
Before we moved into the Mission house, my sister and I had posed for a series of illustrations as my parents explained what it was like to receive a calling from God.
In one, she and I stand next to the cordless phone, looking surprised in oversized shirts, as a rebuttal of what the experience of a call to missions is.
No, they didn’t get a phone call from God.
But Baptists and Presbyterians, really any Protestants who hold to a kind of Reformation understanding of Scripture, exist at the intersection of various theologies that make evangelism crucial to the life of a Christian.
For example, most of the first five books of the New Testament are bookended by evangelism: a version of Jesus telling his disciples to “go into all the world …” appears in the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, and in the book that follows the four on Jesus’ lived experience and teaching, the Acts of the Apostles describes the spread of Christianity through West Asia and into southern Europe.
Though Christianity would spread massively during the persecutions that came after the events of the New Testament, the initial spread is attributed to the “missionary journeys” of the Apostle Paul, who walked or sailed from town to town along the Mediterranean “planting” churches.
It’s this model of ministry that Protestants from the 1800s on understood, and that the New Reformed Evangelicals in the 1990s and 2000s latched onto as one of the callings available to Christians in the continual push to continue evangelizing.
My parents, having been to the mission field themselves as young adults on short term missions trips, wanted churches to know that missionary life was neither to be glamorized nor suffered.
In one slide, showing a digital photo of me in a head-to-toe Spider-man costume, my dad might remark that missionaries aren’t superheroes, and in the next slide, I would be in an
all-tan Safari costume with my dad’s unloaded rifle propped up against my shoulder, to illustrate
that moving to the mission field wasn’t like it might have been in the 1800s, when white folks like David Livingstone disappeared into continental Africa.
On the other hand, Emma’s little nurse costume and my toy dentist’s kit helped illustrate an important real aspect of missionary life: sometimes people just join the field to help people live better lives.
The biggest missions conference that we attended was at an auditorium-size, almost mega-church in Indian Rocks Beach, Florida, which had its own Christian school and thrift store attached to it.
There ought to have been thirty or forty missionary families there from all sorts of sending agencies: medical missionaries, agencies who only sent construction teams to build churches and hospitals and wells, Bible translation agencies, and so on.
Sometimes, we would meet other missionaries from our same agency there, who were going to different countries than us.
It was important that we attended regularly, because those very schoolchildren would come to Nicaragua over spring break in teams of twenty to forty for a taste of Christian service and of life outside the United States.
Nicaragua was popular and consistent for Indian Rocks—compared to other mission fields, it was close by (3.5 hours by plane), cheap, and warm.
At the Indian Rocks church missions conferences, the programming was solid: on Friday, my parents would be assigned to stop in and present in a couple classrooms at the school.
Then, my dad would be registered for a fishing trip on Tampa Bay with church elders and pastors Saturday morning while my mom went shopping with women from the church and other women, or talked at a luncheon.
Of course, my sister and I were also divided into these activities according to our genders.
At some point over the weekend, we would be given a significant gift certificate to the church thrift store, and we would go on a huge spending spree (or it felt as such to me as a child) through the racks of donated hats, t-shirts, and books.
Sometimes, though, missions conferences are very small and intimate.
At a church in Th’Boonies, Florida, and at our one supporting church in Farmtown, Ohio, there might only be three or four missionary families attending.
During Sunday School, lessons before the congregational worship service, there’d be a rotation of the children of different ages through classrooms assigned to each missionary.
As a kid, I was jealous of the jungle missionaries of Amazon and Papua New Guinea.
They ate and drank things more different than anywhere else, like grilled monkey and chicha, a spit-fermented yucca alcohol; they lived on boats; and they shot bows and arrows.
These smaller churches were no less generous to missionaries than the mega-churches; instead of a whole thrift store, they often had what they called “missionary closets,” small storage rooms with donated appliances, some toys, or useful goods that we would each get to pick something out of.
At one small church, I picked a Lego set of a construction mining driller; I was early into a childhood-long attachment to building toys, and it was perfect.
At these conferences my parents, the former teachers, had a variety of activities and tactile demonstrations to communicate where we were going to be missionaries, and why it was important that we and other people like us go.
These came in handy especially when the missions conference overlapped with a Vacation Bible School, a week-long summer school with games, constructed snack foods, songs and dances, puppet shows, and speakers.
The evangelicals have a hundred ways of doing the Gospel story—the Wordless Book (and its fabric cousin, the Wordless Bag), the EvangeCube, a flowchart, the Bridge, some abstract diagrams, and so on.
VBSs are endlessly repeatable and come in themes; I went to a Camelot-themed VBS when we were raising support, a cowboy-themed VBS during a conference ABWE put on for missionaries every few years, and we had suitcases full of a Fiesta!-themed VBS for years after the “missions team” of high schoolers brought the materials down.
What couldn’t transfer, what we couldn’t pick out of the missionary closet or get at the thrift store, but what we’d need, was a new language.
We had a Christian vocabulary built-in (called Christianese), with all its cliches and jargon.
We had song, by which we learned almost everything—the books of the Bible, regular Bible stories, and ethics like general human egalitarianism.
But we didn’t yet have Spanish.
Figure 4: In Memory of Child-Like Faith
We sang our chapter books
our morals;
on our fingers
in circles;
books like ballads
as rondeaus;
We rhymed “one-two-three john”
with Revelation; ownership of text
on our tongues; race into our eyes
as sure’s if it were God’s.
You ask if we felt what we said…
we believed we were, if we were what we sang:
happy all the time, why someone would make us:
who wouldn’t?
We sang ourselves into construction,
foundational concepts, in and out of armies,
as armor hung loosely, candles and freshwater springs,
from our bodies and hearts.
If you sang it fast enough, to spell it almost
sounded out truth;
If you knew the motions, you’d be running:
shield your eyes.
If you were careful little ears, what you heard
was to stop listening.
ROAD #1
The land ABWE bought went by a few names—officially, it was Centro ABEM, but we called it the Center.
Much grew out of the land: neem trees with hard wood, green spindles, and jagged leaves, a seminary building.
Across most of the Center grew a long, sharp grass that was baled and sold.
Later they grew sorghum, which was sold to TipTop, a national fried chicken chain, for animal feed.
Every few years, fire consumed the fields, accidents of the settlements on either side of the land or of a child playing with fire on property.
In the SUV, we would trample along the property fenceline, pretending we were on a savannah, and the grass’d fold back up behind us.


When you entered the Center off the well-paved New Road to Leon, it was on cobblestone, large octagons of concrete that dropped abruptly onto a dirt road that billowed behind you up past a maintenance shed towards the main campground.
It’s the road I learned to drive stick on.
At the top of the hill, cars had to step back up onto the concrete cobblestone, a parking lot very rarely used, stones grown in with hardy grass.
All of it was hard: the heat, the ground, the volcanic pumice stone under the soil, the work my father did to keep it going, the daily drive.


It is unique to nowhere that roads be hard, that they wash out after rainstorms, that they crack under use, that time reclaims them.
The Center has one such road—a gully, 6 feet wide, shaded by ancient chilamate trees, that was once a drover’s road.
It runs in back, still a divot, still a ditch, still more than a ravine.
Until they were paved over while I was in college, desire paths criss-crossed grasses across the campground between the dining hall and sports fields, between the cabins and the pool.
They were man-made or leaf-cutter ant-made.
The ones in our back yard touched the lime tree, the basil bush, the avocados, and my father’s orchids.
HOW WE GOT TO NICARAGUA or, EXODUS
Costa Rica.
ENTRADA / ENTRY
There’s this picture my mom posts on Facebook to commemorate the anniversary of the date we left everything in Florida to become missionaries.
In 2023, the photo was about 17 years old.
In the photograph, in blown-up low-resolution, I’m around eight years old and draped over four suitcases on the pickup curb of the airport in Costa Rica, “guarding” them, looking back at the camera.
Emma, my sister, about to turn six, is perched on top of the luggage, squinting with a babytooth smile across from her Teddy.
It’s January, but it’s warm and breezy, and we’re about to spend a year at language school.
I don’t remember that “first” airplane flight; I imagine I learned that day about how my ears popped when we took off and landed, to chew gum to relieve some of the pressure, or to stop my nose and blow into it to pop them back.
Since we lived in Central America for 10 years after that, though, most of the flights of my childhood have run together.
Part of the trouble with my memory when I look back into my childhood is that I don’t remember many specifics, because I best remember the constants—the airports—and the slow changes that were made to
them over time.
Every airport is somehow archetypal.
Miami was under construction for years and years, as they gradually added the do-it-yourself customs kiosks, global entry, and TSA pre-check.
Atlanta is massive, with its underground spinal corridor connecting six long concourses, but it has two Chick-fil-A’s, and even if our layover was short, we might stop in whichever concourse was on the way to get some.
Chick-fil-A, intentionally or not, was almost always our first meal when we returned to the United States from Central America.
Though we have our preferences as a family—Atlanta, Miami, Orlando, Fort Lauderdale, Tampa—the
airports are not much more than signifiers for the airline we were flying, and how long customs would take to get through.
SALIDA / EXIT
When we first left Florida, we went one way, and all our belongings went the other: we flew to San Jose, Costa Rica, and our stuff was packed into a shipping container and put on a boat for Nicaragua.
Our container probably shipped through the Panama canal, was loaded onto a truck in Corinto or one of Nicaragua’s Pacific coast port cities, and then was driven up the foothills onto that plain Managua sits on.
Then, it sat in the lot of a customs office under a bundle of red tape which, in the experience of some missionaries, is a keyword for administrators seeking a little “financial encouragement” in exchange for release of goods.
Even without red tape, the customs offices in the airport or at the Costa Rica–Nicaragua border had all of the same rules and regulations, which we became familiar with soon after moving to language school.
In both countries, tourist visas only last around three months, so every dozen-or-so weeks we would cross in to the opposite country by bus or car and stay with an ABWE missionary we knew there until we could re-enter, re-purchase another 3-month tourist visa, and go back to school.
ARRIVAL OR DEPARTURE CUSTOMS
At the airport, after you recover your luggage from baggage claim, there’s one last room we tense up to walk through before we hit the curb, pickup lanes, and parking lot.
It’s a side room to the left, past the duty-free liquor stores selling the national brand of rum, Flor de Caña.
In it are four conveyor belt x-ray machines, through which every bag, not just your carry-ons, must be processed, and it’s the government officials’ last chance to seize the goods in your luggage before you enter the country.
It’s happened to us before, but never as badly as has happened to others—laptops and cameras, electronics and valuables confiscated, reasonlessly, held in indeterminate detention.
Friends have worked for weeks, driving out to the airport warehouses, in attempts to get their luggage released from the same office our shipping container would arrive at.
It was an early suggestion to us as foreigners to hold onto our possessions loosely, to pack in our checked baggage only the things we needed.
Sometimes, the bags would be lost altogether, and it was important to have packed maybe a change of clothes in the personal items we never parted with.
NOMBRES (GIVEN NAME)
Early on when we moved to Costa Rica, I learned I don’t have a very transferable name between English and Spanish.
My first name, Peter, is translateable, but not transliterable.
“Peh-tehr,” I’ve been called.
“Pedro” is what I ask most Spanish-speakers to call me, but I’m not allowed to call myself that to the customs agent because it’s not on my passport.
I have to be “Pet-air,” because that’s what’s written down.
Not that I’m blaming anybody.
It’s our fault, as English-speakers, that our vowels have so many pronunciations.
Once, a Nicaraguan who knew me as “Peet-air” made a wooden keychain for each person on our missions team, and over the course of the VBS we were doing at their church took everyone’s name down.
When I got the keychain with my
name wood-burned into it, it had been Spanish-phonetically transcribed “Pitter.” So don’t even get me started on my middle name, Douglas.
Saying it with a Spanish pronunciation almost approximates its Gaelic origin, dubh glas, “dark stream,” and the irony of this is not lost on me, that my given names translate to “rock [from] dark stream.” Especially since this wasn’t intentional.
Douglas is just my dead grandad, who died the year before I was born.
When Emma and I became missionary kids, even our names, the essential features of our identities, became contextual, repronounceable, multiple.
Emma, Jema, Engma; Peter, Paitair, Pitter.
The Central Americans we lived with, our friends, teachers, and colleagues, added an appropriate ending to our name that communicated endearment, the caring diminutive Emm-ita, Pedr-ito, Laur-ita.
APELLIDOS (SURNAME)
My last name is hard for the opposite reason as my first two.
In much of the world, including Nicaragua, Edgar is a first name, which caused much confusion.
From third to twelfth grade, every first progress report I received from my school in October, a yellow manila folder with the little red lash tie, I had to cross out a small ‘d’ tacked onto the end of my name.
“Edgard,” from third to twelfth grade.
Sometimes, in public, we’d be misnamed Edward, too, and since then we’ve kept a list of all the ways that we’ve been mistaken (though Dad, Bruce, has it maybe worst of all: Bruss, Brush, Brucks, Bruise, Brux, Brice, Brus…).
But there’s also something beautiful in the Latin-American keeping of surnames, the family consciousness, the length and richness of family union that’s preserved when one’s name can carry forward.
How Connelly Coachman and Schneiss Edgar could have become a new combination, Coachman Edgar, that passes down to each sibling.
NATIONALITY
Of course, being in second grade when I arrived in Costa Rica, I didn’t know that I would be subject to the nationality question for the rest of my life, a question tied to my appearance, my way of speaking both English and Spanish, and my way of telling the story of my own self.
There is one “right” answer to the question “where are you from?” but there’s a world inside it.
Legally, I am American.
There were a couple moments in college where I wanted this answer to mean more than it does—‘American’ in the Jose Marti, “we are all American because these two continents are called America” way, and then I eschewed the term for the transliteration of the Spanish specific, “Unitedstatesean.” I am a citizen of the U.S.A.
Though many missionary kids have the same experience as me—being born in the U.S.
and moving—there are many, especially younger siblings, who are born on the mission field, and receive dual citizenship by birthright.
Culturally, there’s sort of a different story.
I do feel patriotic about Nicaragua: every September, when most of Latin America begins to celebrate their Independence Days, every schoolkid participated in the class dramas, the poetry recitals, and the historical
re-enactments of Nicaraguans shrugging off Spain’s monarchy, then attempted conquests by American filibusters, then the socialist revolutions of the Cold War.
For missionary kids like my sister, who don’t remember their lives before they moved to the mission field, though they don’t have a legal tie to Nicaragua, their personal and emotional ties are much stronger with the place they grew up than with our so-called “home country.”
The nationality question is presented to me everywhere, and is tied to the depth of language acquisition Emma and I achieved when we were young, being plugged right into Spanish classes for an hour a day from kindergarten, in her case, and second grade, in mine, at Sojourn Christian
School, where we attended while our parents were enrolled in day school at ILE, the Spanish Language Institute in San Jose, at the top of a hill both institutions were built on.
We enrolled there in January, planning to stay a whole calendar year on the three-trimester schedule appropriate for the Spanish curriculum that my parents were going to undergo.
Leaving mid-school year meant that my second grade experience was sharply partitioned.
In the last few months before we moved to Costa Rica, I attended Lakeland Christian, as I had for Kindergarten before pre-field.
Still, I remember Ms.
Oncu, and all my very young friendships with the other second-graders in the mobile home classrooms on the edge of campus, better than I do most of the students I took class with in Costa Rica, and the two teachers I had, Ms.
Barbie and Ms.
Davis, for the second half of second grade and the first half of third grade.
SEX
In Costa Rica, Emma and I became involved in after-school activities, and it was at this time that the differences between she, the girl Edgarchild, and I, the boy Edgarchild, started feeling unfair.
At first, we were both enrolled in gymnastics.
The gym and auditorium at Sojourn was huge, because it was where we would have all our assemblies, Independence Day included.
It was large and open, with a concrete floor and cinder block walls.
Because the ground was so hard, when we did gymnastics we would pull out mats from the supply closet and set them up around the high bar and the balance beam, and out in long rows so that we could practice our routines—basic bouncing, kicking, somersaulting, and cartwheeling—safely.
It was fun; in Florida, we had had a trampoline in our backyard, and the smaller gymnastics trampolines were a small substitute while ours was in the container somewhere in the Caribbean.
I don’t remember the day it happened—the memories depersonalize, the moments are disembodied.
But Dad switched me to indoor soccer after a semester in gymnastics.
It was kind
of too late, though, because I had already learned everything I needed to know to occupy myself midfield.
Before I ever had a grasp on the mechanics of soccer (besides ball-in-goal), I figured I could have a lot more fun showing the boys do something they couldn’t (cartwheel), because they could do things I couldn’t, like dribble the ball, make clean passes, or steal.
Dad called me a cherry-picker, but he couldn’t do anything to stop me from completely ignoring the soccer ball as it passed me left and right on the indoor court in the same gym just months before I had been practicing routines on the balance beam.
That didn’t mean I didn’t make friends with other kids at Sojourn.
I left the soccer to Joel, my first Costa Rican friend whose mom taught me “special Spanish,” or the Spanish for
non-native speakers just starting out.
Plus, I became friends with a few other missionary kids who were in my exact same boat, at the same time that our parents were becoming friends.
Some of them would leave to start ministry in Peru, Chile, or Mexico, but the Brassfields and the Knoxes, whose kids Natalie and Jacob were in my class, were coming to Nicaragua with us, though with different sending agencies.
DATE OF BIRTH
In July, I had my first international birthday at our three-bedroom apartment in Costa Rica, the ground floor of a four-story building owned by a local family.
Our apartment had a garden walled-in around it, and to that birthday, I invited Joel, the Brassfields (Natalie, the twins Melanie and Emily, and Isaac, who was in Emma’s class), and Jacob, who also had twin sisters).
The party was Scooby-Doo themed, and just because my mom didn’t have her Pampered Chef kitchen with her doesn’t mean she couldn’t absolutely turn it.
Even though the oven couldn’t open the whole way, since the kitchen was so narrow, the cake was baked, shaped, and decorated like the Mystery Machine, and Mom made Scooby Snack-shaped peanut butter cookies.
The garden at our house was lush, my first experience of the tropics, with its heavy loam and banana trees, humidity trapped under layers of trees, moisture cooling the patio tiles and tiles outside whose edges stuck up and stubbed my bare toes when I ran out the back and around to the front, barefoot.
We had to hunt for clues inside and out before pinning the tail onto a color print-out of Scooby himself.
Beyond the party itself being one of the highlights of what I remember from Costa Rica, it was one of the clearest memories I have of being surrounded by people who talked my language, wanted to play with me with my little Bionicle Lego sets, which looked like spiders but could launch a spinner into the air with a small ripcord—we spent a whole afternoon chasing after them.
The important part of having kids who were going through the same thing as us, at this time, is not just that we had each other.
I felt lonely, and I would’ve been lonelier if it hadn’t been for my friends.
Emma had been taking the move hard, and was developing a hypersensitivity to touch and fabric that made a lot of her clothes uncomfortable and was getting used to her new glasses, little red plastic frames with Garfield on them.
She required a lot of close attention and calming, and her room was immediately across from my parents’, while mine was down the hall, closer to the front of the house.
A staircase ended in a ceiling between them.
I’d play my GameBoy advanced in my room, or read the Narnia series in my parents’ room until it was time for me to go to bed.
Meanwhile, my parents bargained with Emma, who yelled “IT DOESN’T FEEL GOOD” from her closet, on a shirt that didn’t scrape her tender skin.
MEANS OF TRANSPORTATION - BY AIR, BY LAND, BY SEA
In Costa Rica, we walked everywhere we could, including to school.
Our apartment was on a slope that ended down at the Parque Chino, which had a metal playground and a steep artificial hill.
Catacorner from where our street met the Parque was a pizza place that played the
TV loud, but made thin crust like Mom likes it.
In the opposite direction, a block or two down, was Musmanni, the bakery and cafe, that we walked past every school day.
Because we didn’t have a car, my parents would take a taxi to the grocery store or to other locations outside of driving range.
The city taxis were aggressive drivers, but they accessorized their car interiors with beaded steering wheel covers, seat modifications, and odometers that looked like the cab had been carjacked.
Emma or I would sometimes have to sit on my mom’s lap so we could all fit in the back, but if we hit a speed bump too hard, our heads would hit the ceiling.
AIRLINE AND FLIGHT N0 / VESSEL NAME AND TRIP N0 / VEHICLE REGISTRATION N0
Sojourn and ILE made language school as much a cultural and natural education as a linguistic one, and provided for trips all around the country.
to the beach, to the La Paz Waterfall Gardens, and to crater lakes and Arenal, an active volcano with a hot springs.
We’d take field trips and weekend trips to both the Caribbean and the Pacific, where some kids, like Jacob, learned to surf.
Though the beaches had darker, coarser sand than Florida, it still felt like home to go out and build sandcastles and sand mermen (with abs) like we had with our cousins on the Gulf Coast.
Though taxis were on the jank end of the spectrum, the tourism buses were luxury.
Because of how the governments regulate the tourism industry, each of these buses had their occupation stamped on their back hips, and their destinations flashed from the display in the front windshield.
“Can you tell where we’re going today?” my mom once asked.
“Wait,” I said back, “why are all these buses going to Tourismo?”
COUNTRY OF DEPARTURE
We moved to Costa Rica in January, so the last Christmases in between Costa Rica and Nicaragua, we stayed with Mimi and Papa, next door to the house on the grove that we’d
recently vacated for good (very quickly after, they rented it out to another family, and I couldn’t walk by it without a kind of eerie feeling of liminality and displacement—that place had been mine once; my treehouse was still standing in the backyard.
But I couldn’t walk inside, or cross that invisible line between the Coachmans’ house and the land of the Replacements’.
That Christmas, as well as my last birthday before we moved, Emma and I got gifts that we wouldn’t see again for a year or two after.
On Christmas morning, I woke up in the basement floor of their split-level in my Narnia PJs and crawled up the half-staircase to see a new play kitchen for Emma behind the Christmas tree in Mimi and Papa’s dining room, and a “big” green and black bicycle for me.
I rode it around in their driveway, feeling like an off-roader.
Then, we left.
COUNTRY OF RESIDENCE
Costa Rica’s airports have more going on than Managua’s.
For decades, Costa Rica has positioned itself at the center of the eco-tourism movement, prioritized environmental protection, invested in infrastructure that would make accessing the outdoors possible, and profiting from the curation of the forest and agricultural products (coffee, chocolate, and tropical fruit) for tourist consumption.
When you take the escalator up into the airport terminal in Liberia, an airport in the north of Costa Rica, closer to the border with Nicaragua, at the top is a massive Cafe Britt coffee and chocolate company store.
In Managua, the national brands are for rum (Flor de Caña) and coffee (Café las Flores), separately, and they have small kiosks near the elevator.
Compared to the United States airports, the international airports are itty bitty, with one main terminal and a few restaurants somehow handling thousands of visitors per day.
I imagined each of these airports was a final destination, a small hub at the edge of the world.
I wouldn’t find out until high school that Mexico City and Panama City are hubs for their own Central-American airlines, AeroMéxico and Copa.
Carretera a Masaya.
COUNTRY OF DESTINATION
In the Managua airport, once you’ve checked in at the counter, you walk past your last chance to buy generic souvenirs from artisans who have kiosks in the airport lobby, and past the food court, and past then a circle of 10 or 12 busts of major Nicaraguan figures, in-between two high-hung, wall-length portraits: one of Ruben Dario, a major Latin-American modernist poet who I’m told memorized the dictionary as a child, and one of Augusto Sandino, the
generations-removed revolutionary figure for whom the currently-in-power Sandinista party is named.
The airport is small, just one terminal long, upstairs from the check-in counters and the food court.
There are maybe six or seven gates, and besides the duty free store, there’s a glass wall-case of visual art in the Nicaraguan primitivist style—highly detailed, bright landscapes of volcanoes, lakes, jungle canopies, and small towns with terracotta roofs and oxcarts.
The terminal looks out over the runway, which looks south towards the city of Masaya, but from the terminal seats you can’t see beyond the military pillbox guarding the reaches of the airport property, behind it the always-green foliage, the dusty hills, the long fields.
ROAD #2
Managua, which spans the south shore of Lake Xolotlan, is a rectangular city of 1.4 million, with a low population density because in 1972, a Richter 6.3 earthquake kilometers offshore from the city leveled all but a few buildings higher than three stories tall.
The five highways that exit the city do so in its corners: Old Highway to Leon and South Highway the southwest, New Highway to Leon the northwest, Highway to Masaya the southeast, and Pan-American Highway the northeast.
At the widest, they’re five lanes.
So, in the beginning, every drive was a long one.



When we moved to Managua, we moved in with my parents’ now-colleagues Bev and Larry, on Highway to Masaya.
The Smiths, Robinsons, Henzlers, and Larges were four missionary families already there when ABWE purchased the 160-acre trapezoid of undeveloped land on New Highway to Leon.
My dad, once we arrived, became its scheduling, accounting, and maintenance director, and drove 40 minutes there and back through Managua’s winding city streets.
On Sundays, we attended church past it, past Mateare, an hour drive behind tinted glass.


I tell you so that you might understand why I remember sleeping and reading in the Isuzu more than I remember riding in it.
Until age 15, I climbed right over the back seats without putting them down into the more quiet WayBack.
I blew through the books I’d brought with me from Florida: chapter books, reference books, paperbacks, and Spanish-language story books; I did my homework, too.
At church held under a tree, our Sunday school before that was held under an awning, we laid out furniture blankets, which folded in the back made for a huge, dusty pillow.
FORESEEN ADDRESS
The Smiths’ house on Carretera a Masaya was built like a Spanish mission, and it almost felt like a barracks.
The house had a long, cobblestone driveway, where Larry’s red truck and a microbus were parked, and a small foyer that led the huge red-tiled living room.
The house was optimized for airflow; it was a straight shot from the foyer through the living room and dining room to the large back porch and the backyard.
On either side of the open space as a row of rooms: an office, a long kitchen and laundry room on the left, and bedrooms and bathrooms on the right.
Before the ministry center ABWE was developing was built, the Smiths hosted teams of visitors in their home, and so had several bunk beds in the bedrooms which connected both to the bathrooms and to the main living room.
Living with the Smiths during this time was most meaningful to Mom, who said it was from Bev that she learned how to be a missionary wife— what it would require to run a house, a household, and care for me and Emma while Dad did day-to-day work at the ministry center.
Even though she in many ways remained a stay-at-home mother, there were so many new ways of life to get used to; ultimately, there are so many chores
that she did what most missionary families do, which is hire and develop a work partnership with a domestic employee that could do the day-to-day housework, which allowed Mom too to participate in ministry.
NUMBER OF RELATIVES TRAVELLING WITH YOU
When we became part of our missionary family, every colleague of my parents became “Aunt” and “Uncle,” every missionary kid in the group our kind-of cousins.
We did holidays together, like Thanksgiving dinners, Christmas parties, and Fourth-of-July grill-outs, and regularly spent meals with one another.
If we lived nearby to each other, we’d carpool to and from school.
We often laughed because, as kids, Emma and I would mix up “Aunt Larry” and
“Uncle Bev.” While we lived with them, we were introduced to Uncle Mark and Aunt Diane Henzler, Uncle Andy and Aunt Di Large, and Uncle Steve and Aunt Terri Robinson.
Though the Henzlers and Robinsons were in age like true older aunts and uncles, the Smiths and the Larges were like two new sets of grandparents, generationally.
They and the Henzlers had all been missionaries in Peru, Chile, and Ecuador before coming to Nicaragua, and spoke Spanish, had built connections in-country, and were focused on preparing to begin the Institute of Church Planters alongside the ABWE Center.
Uncle Steve was an engineer, and oversaw the development of the initial dozen buildings there.
The Center became unique among ministry centers for eschewing the “compound” model common to missionary endeavors in the 20th century, which bordered in a sanctuary space with walls and gates.
For the missionaries, the Center wasn’t an escape into a “safer” section of a city, but an escape out into God’s creation.
Out of all of my “Aunts” and “Uncles” that we quickly came to know and love, as much as my own family, Uncle Andy and Aunt Di were unique in that they had been missionary kids themselves.
They had grown up in Peru in two separate missionary families, and when they were of age, they married and had missionary kids of their own, who were grown-ups when we met them.
In their house, which, near to the Smiths’, overlooked Managua from the hills near the mall on the south side of the city, they had a huge portrait of their family.
In the picture is Andy and Di with their kids, standing on the prow of a houseboat they sailed up and down the Amazon river when they were in their twenties and thirties.
Andy and Di, as well as the Smiths, already knew what it would be like for me and Emma, and the Henzlers’ kids Suzanna and Andrew, and the Robinson’s daughter Kellan, to grow up outside of the United States, and they’d sometimes throw babysitting parties with all of us together so that the adults could go out alone.
I think, though I don’t know for sure, that they coached Mom and Dad too, on how to help us adjust, but
I know for sure that in Emma’s late high school years, when political violence tore Nicaraguan society in half once again, that they were the first people they spoke to, a sanctuary for them when they came back to the U.S.
to help my sister move into college and to take time to process the trauma they had witnessed during that time.
ROAD #3
<<EL DESPERTAR: EL DESPERTAR, EN LA MAÑANA!>>
For fifteen years, my parents have joked that even though they had graduated from the certificate program at ILE in San José, that Costa Rica taught them the wrong Spanish.
In our first year in Nicaragua, we lived 40 minutes from my elementary school, and as I slept in the way back of the dusty, gray dusty gray Isuzu Trooper, they listened to broadcast talk radio to tune their own ears away from the shushing Costa Rican dialect and toward the yoyo of Nicaraguan Spanish.



this isn’t the poem about Spanish, though.
I’ve written about language before, enough for you to be able to zip up that story and this This is the piece about the Isuzu, the dust like thread that quilts squares to the cotton that grows where I write, like every field crop: that gathered again and again on the back backing in and out of each square story-lot rice & cane sugar, red bean & rice again after roads that wound through neighborhoods & field & riverbed & beach & spare rooms (& reminding me of) storms washing out roads.
The Isuzu was long-lived, and it saw us through many, many hours back and forth from the Smiths’ tucked-away house on Highway to Masaya to our school on Old Highway to León.
Many roads were named this way—to colonial cities from the compromise-capital, Managua.
One road rules them all: Pan-American Highway, by which, if I were a real romantic, I could assert ‘all of America is connected.’ Really, it was just the road my new neighborhood was on: South Highway, Kilometer 12.7 (and, when we moved across the street, Kilometer 12.9).
Carretera Sur, Pt.
1: The “Embassy House”
The first house that was “ours” in Nicaragua was so small, and walled off so that the country that was “ours” (the U.S.) could house its people there.
The block was made of four U.S.
embassy-approved two-story concrete homes, with an L-shaped strip of grass around two sides.
Vines strung in ‘F’s up and horizontal along the concrete walls a story-and a half high, cement and rebar cinder blocks.
(Google would’ve had me saying these flowers are cat’s claw—the yellow flower on the vine looks the same.
They’re really yellow allamandas, the difference being that golden trumpets, as they’re also called, bear a fist-sized spiky seed pod, and leech a milk sap that’s used as an emetic and purgative drug.) The spiky seed pods along the vine grew inside the winding stretched slinky of razor wire on top of the wall.
QUANTITY OF LUGGAGE (HANDBAGS & CHECK-IN) THAT TRAVELS WITH YOU QUANTITY OF LUGGAGE NOT TRAVELLING WITH YOU
When the container finally arrived, it was like Christmas and birthday all over again.
We moved the container out to the Center, actually, and little by little Dad brought our belongings home.
At first, we got a number of books and small toys that were easily re-packaged.
An example was my Army men, for whom I dug WWI trenches in the Smiths’ back yard.
When our first Nicaraguan rainy season hit, sometime in April, the trenches flooded, mudded, overnight, and many men were lost to the deluge; the play area was as if I’d never dug there.
When we moved out of the Smiths house, we had space to bring home larger items like the electric piano I had been promised my birthday the July before we moved to Costa Rica, almost two years before, and Emma’s toy kitchen.
We lived a ways away from other missionary kids at the Smiths’, entirely across town from our new school, Nicaragua Christian Academy, so books held us over.
In the meantime, Grandma Edgar began sending a monthly mailer to our new
P.O.
Box in the middle of Managua’s busy neighborhoods, which we’d wait weeks for between when she emailed that she’d sent them and when they finally arrived.
Every time, the package had already been opened, searched, and screened by customs, and then been taped back shut.
Inside were fruit snacks, holiday cards, the funnies from a few weeks of Lakeland’s Sunday paper, and sometimes, gloriously, a chapter book.
Emma and I devoured whatever came: Harry Potter, Junie B.
Jones, the Magic Tree House Series— I learned to love and anticipate new readings, and to stay up way past bedtime at the Smith’s house sitting on the counter of the bathroom, reading by night-light.
I’d burn my elbow on the plug-in Raid! mosquito repellent thermacell, but it felt worth it.
HAVE YOU BEEN GRANTED ANY TAX EXEMPTION IN THE LAST 6 MONTH?
The biblical book of Job, an early epic poem, is about suffering—this great, justice-doing man, Job, loses his property to a tornado, his family to a collapsed house, and his possessions to raiders, all in the same day.
Then he loses his health, and he itches at his open sores with shards of broken pots.
My dad chose to joke in the years following that he had been reading the Book of Job during the period of time we were robbed—in fact, any time something horrible happened to us—as if God was giving us application questions for homework after completing the reading.
It was a Sunday; we had been at church.
My parents remarked in hindsight that they had likely shadowed our house for weeks in advance, had known that we would be gone that morning.
We arrived back to our house, making the left turn up the hill when, before turning right into the driveway, Dad stopped the Trooper.
“Bruce,” Mom said.
“What is it?” I asked from the back seat.
Dad put the car in park.
He and Mom looked out of the windshield, and waited for a moment before moving again.
“Stay here,” Dad said.
He gave her the keys.
“Be careful,” Mom said.
As soon as Dad got out, she locked the doors.
“What is it?” I asked again.
“Wait,” she told me back, looking worried.
I don’t know how long we waited, but then Dad came back.
Mom started to explain that someone had broken in, had cut off the lock holding our gate shut, and gone in through the back door.
They’d taken our electronics, some valuables, and Mom’s jewelry, some of which she normally wore except for when we went out to super low-income towns and churches.
Ironically, it wasn’t because she was worried about being robbed that she left her jewelry at home, but because she didn’t want to flash the jewels on her anniversary ring or the diamond necklace Dad had given her and bring attention to the obvious wealth difference between us and our “national partners,” what ABWE calls local pastors, leaders, and churchgoers.
ARE YOU CARRYING CASH, TITLE, OBJECTS, PRECIOUS METALS OR A COMBINATION OF THESE EQUAL TO OR GREATER THAN US$ 10,000.00?
Nicaragua is one of the safer countries in Central America.
But despite the walls, the gates, the razorwire, the grass that grew in front, the spiky allamanda seed pods, no number of spikes could make me feel safe in the house after we were robbed.
Even after a couple more houses on the street were robbed, and the block pitched in to hire and feed a daily patrol, life felt off.
The same messaging I was taught with the Book of Job tries as an example (that suffering happens, that who knows why but God, that it’s silly to question)—is repeated by Christians in relationship to martyrdom.
There’s the OG book, Foxe’s Book of Martyrs, which came out in
1563, and then there’s the update: Jesus Freaks: Stories of Those who Stood For Jesus, released by Christian organization Voice of the Martyrs and the Christian rap rock trio DC Talk.
From the very first Christian martyr, Stephen, to the updated stories of Christian martyrs behind the Iron Curtain and under various other ideological and religious regimes, the point I received as a child was “let the stories of these people suffering worse than you inspire greater faith in God!” For someone with genuine faith, maybe this does work—and as an adult, secular or religious, I still find myself repeating the “it could be worse” logic to myself often.
But I was 9, and at the time being robbed was a big deal to me.
It was one of several things that happened in Nicaragua (that, for the record, could have happened to me in the United States), but it was my first memory of human danger, of ill-intended human harm.
Is it evidence of trauma or strength that I’m calloused to disastrous events, because I don’t choose to dwell on them? I want to write truthfully, but as I read back, everything just seems like a matter of fact.
Maybe because that’s the sort of thing you feel when you realize you haven’t been taking seriously before that bad things have happened to you.
“Things are just things,” except they’re not.
Am I foolish for crying over the CD player they stole? Everything was replaced, eventually.
Was there anything they took that wasn’t? Maybe the CD in the player, except I don’t remember what that was.
How tempted I am to leave this paragraph off with “None of it matters anymore anyways,” but some things do matter.
IF YOU MARKED YES, PLEASE PROVIDE THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION:
The driveway gate was only a dozen feet from the front door with its own deadbolt and its black, iron-barred, keylock screen gate.
Whoever robbed us knew it would take a moment to saw through the gates, or pick the locks, or make it out, and it would have been conspicuous.
Emma, Mom and I sat in the car for quite a while as my dad called Larry and Bev, the police, and then
conferred with our neighbors, who said they had seen nothing.
Then, Mom went inside to clean up the broken glass and tidy up the house so that Emma and I might not be so frightened to come in.
Little did she know I was making active use of my imagination.
I knew that when the robbers broke in, our neighbors across the street watched the whole time, thinking that we were moving, or that we had hired someone to.
We’d been 45 minutes away at church, and we knew that they knew—or at least we thought we knew that they knew, that they’d been watching us the whole time.
That year, someone told me that gangs and robbers will leave small signs outside of someone’s house to signal: maybe trash caught in the chicken wire under the gate means they’re gone on Saturdays, or shoes hanging over the power lines meant they work late.
Even a smudge of paint on the driveway could mean anything.
My Christian heritage might have also suggested that it’s not worth crying over stolen possessions (“Store up your treasures in heaven!”).
It’s childish, maybe, but I was a child.
Though I could write off my losses – the CD player, the TV, a bike – as “just stuff,” it doesn’t change that I didn’t feel safe.
Being robbed scared me, and made me suspicious.
The nameless, faceless perpetrator became, in my child’s mind, any Nicaraguan, and I became suspicious of anyone that might be near my home.
I applied this discrimination indiscriminately—any Nicaraguan.
In markets, walking among the potters, butchers, landscape painters, cobblers, and hammock weavers, I would “see” the particular CD-player that was taken in the robbery.
Years later, even through middle school, I would be convinced that the one a street vendor carried at the stoplight, among the jugglers and boys with stacks of roasted cashews, was the one that had stolen from us.
Once I went over to my friend Gabriel’s house to play GameCube and wondered if his had been bought off the robbers—or if his older brother was the one who had done it.
ARE YOU CARRYING LIVE ANIMALS, PLANTS, FRESH FOODS, OR DERIVED FROM ANY OF THESE?
After the robbery, Nicaraguan food first took up residence at home: Azucena, who became our housekeeper on recommendation from another missionary family, cooked for the guard on the days when it was our turn among the cooperative.
For years, I would wonder if Azucena had stolen my Legos, the ones that I would find under my bed or behind the bookshelf weeks later.
My parents always defended her, and they were right, because I would find where I misplaced the Legos later.
Was it the robbery that made me this way, or was it just the amount of unfamiliarity and change that moving to Nicaragua put me in the place to be as hypervigilant as I became? Per that good old Baptist doctrine of original sin, anyone can act with such racism; it just takes a nudge, the same way a single, grating offhand comment someone makes can ruin your relationship with them.
•••
We got Molly, my first dog, before the robbery, but she was no help when it happened.
Molly was a black labrador, a big bunch of energy, a little bigger than pure puppy when we got her; I named her after a character in my favorite book series at the time (Harry Potter, after Mrs.
Weasley).
I imagined her like Nana-Dog in Peter Pan, a second mother.
The day of the robbery, she was unharmed, but was such a good-spirited dog that we joked that if she had thumbs, she would have let the robbers in herself.
In the back of the car, I was relieved that my parents didn’t wait long to tell me she was okay, but I wanted to imagine her barking at the robbers, pulling at the cord of the television as they carried it out of back door of the house, or standing in between the robbers and that dang CD player.
The truth was, Molly was more destructive to what the robbers left behind than the robbers themselves.
Even though we had a responsibility to walk Molly, our yard was much too small for a lab, and she was underworked and restless.
Molly became a chewer.
She chewed through her toys, the seat of Dad’s bicycle, the siding on my Mom’s new (secondhand) green Chevy sedan, until she got on my mom’s last nerve: the edge of her new faux-leather brown couch.
Mom still tells the story with a tense, dark laugh: It was the one time I had to say to Bruce, “It’s either me, or the DOG!” I loved Molly with everything, but it was time for her to go.
Dad took her out to the ministry center, where she would have 160 acres to roam, and other dogs to run with.
It was better for her there.
Soon after, our new missionary family, the Woughters, had a dog who had just had a litter.
The Woughters had bought Vini, short for Vainilla, in Costa Rica, and she had puppies with another french poodle, and they were looking for homes.
I came home from school one day to a new little guy, who I got to name Pippin, after the hobbit character in Lord of the Rings, which I was probably reading for the first time around then.
Pippin was the runt of his litter, but he grew taller than all of his own family members, the biggest of them at fifteen pounds.
We didn’t know until later that Pippin was the perfect bridge dog, the dog that would help me move through Molly’s passing after living for several very happy long years at Centro ABEM.
By that time, Facebook had been invented, and I recently found the only photo I have of Molly: captioned, by my dad: Dog #1 - Molly - run over by bus - RIP.
Figure 5 : Molly Caught the Bus
there are stories we forget we carry • from life to life, country to country • like a five-dollar bill in a coat pocket
our first dog was a black Labrador • i came home from fourth grade to find • a dark animal on the white tile of our tiny house • first animal i felt could love me back • like a chapter book mother • what meaning i invested in what dad called a “pet” • before we had to send her away to camp • 640 times more space to run, rice bowls • double-daily plus whatever she caught herself
our dog finally caught the bus • to heaven while I was at school • she was buried beneath where she sat • day after day in the shade of the sun • a hole dug out of a hole she dug • a well in the dirt next to the water pump well • she had chased it many times before • she had chased cars • put her big puppy jaws around their siding • clamped, gnawed • maybe she hoped for a ride home
she never demanded the passenger seat • or to sit in the Way-Back • just a lip to hold onto, • a lip to stand on, the wind in her face
DO YOU CARRY OTHER GOODS DIFFERENT THAN YOUR LUGGAGE? IF YOU MARKED YES, PLEASE PROVIDE THE FOLLOWING:
ROAD #4
Intersections across Managua are stationed with artisans.
On many corners, windshield washers, persistent even if one’s windshield had been washed at the previous corner, even when my dad wagged his finger ‘no.’ Insistent on 25¢ in form of one 5 Cordoba coin, which depreciated in value on controlled inflation; called Cords, they frayed in value.
On another corner might have been cashew vendors, roasted nuts stacked,
several children, juggling some balls stacked on their shoulders for clarity.
or else juggling fruits, or selling them, running between a grill and the cars
or little folded palm fronds, or trinkets with ears of roasted corn, or tortillas.
On many streetsides were whole -ías pupuserías, panaderías, quesillerías,
—the -ies of each stovecooked food.
Carlines made obstructive third lanes.

Mom and Dad thought that children who begged at semáforos had “handlers” of some kind that collected their tips.
Instead of 20-cord notes, they put together goodie bags of things only kids could benefit from, and kept them in the cars’ center consoles: cookies and crackers, wrapped in cellophane with a gospel tract.
SIGNATURE
That period feels very compressed in my memory—as if it only took a year for us to get a dog, get robbed, send the dog to camp, get a new dog, and move again.
It was longer.
I DECLARE UNDER OATH THAT THE INFORMATION PROVIDED IS TRUE AND I HAVE READ THE INSTRUCTIONS ON THE BACK OF THIS DECLARATION.

FECHA DE ENTRADA / SALIDA
We moved to Nicaragua in January of 2007.
I was halfway through third grade.
Nicaragua’s tourist visa costs ten dollars, which we paid until we got our residency cards (cedulas) approved more than a year later.
DATE OF ENTRY / EXIT
I moved back to the United States for college in May of 2016.
I was about to turn 18.
I began paying for a tourist visa a year or two later, when my Nicaraguan residency expired.
My folks still live there.
Introduction
HOW I CAME TO UNDERSTAND WHAT IS ‘GOOD’ or, LEVITICUS
As a child, I was profoundly concerned, by way of my early Bible education, with the difference between right and wrong.
I often think of it as a product of being the elder child, but it wasn’t just that.
Early into my parents’ self-conceptualization as “missionaries,” I was encouraged to self-identify as a “missionary kid.” Today, we have a broader word for this that includes any kid with experiences like mine, religious or not: a third-culture kid (TCK).
TCKs, a more inclusive word than Missionary Kid (MK), is slang for a transnationally-raised child who neither conforms to their home or national culture nor their received or second-home culture.
A major part of the reasoning my parents gave me for behaving well, for obedience, was rooted in the Bible, but by extension, I was given the impression that my parents’ mission to Nicaragua had a Public Relations component attached to it, which in Christianese we call “Witness.” I think “witness” is a rich word, but I’ve had to recontextualize the noun form to become a more integrated adult since it was first introduced to me.
The old definition is nearer to “reputation,” a self-presentation, “Christ-likeness,” which I was responsible for towards Christians and non-Christians alike.
I had a personal witness; also, our family as a whole had a witness to keep up, especially when we were visiting other American churches, and played out in our manners of being, our manners, the language we used, and our interpersonal behavior.
If you’ve grown up in a morally-structured community like mine, you know that one’s spirituality might constantly be measured against other people’s.
When I was in graduate school, a friend of mine from Bible camp thoughtfully gave me a book out of this culture: 10 Questions to Diagnose Your Spiritual Health.
Do You Thirst for God?
Um, yeah, “Like a deer pants for streams of water, so my soul longs after you.” (Psalm 42) I am a Gen-Z person of faith in the post-postmodern, post-9/11 corecore era.
It’s a Gordian Knot! And is Deconstruction supposed to be the sword of Alexander? What’s the aftermath? Some sort of reconstruction? – I make my refusal to migrate beliefs in the face of destruction.
My defiance of both the e- and the ex-vangelical.
“EL” is a name of God’s; Beth(el): house of god.
“Body is a temple, of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom you received.” (1 Cor 6) I embody that.
When I graduated from Kindergarten Sunday School class, I was given my first personal Bible, a New King James Version with a black cover and metallic-edged pages, the words of Jesus in red.
I heard all of the Christian calls-to-action, the talk around something we call “saved,” and asked them what it meant.
As they explained what someone has to believe to become a Christian, to be saved, they tell me I said, “Well, I believe that!” and that they helped me pray to God that he would save me.
This means I first made what we call in the business “A profession of faith” around probably around 5 or 6, if not earlier.
I was baptized later, over a furlough, by our home church pastor.
Standing waist-deep in water in the baptistry elevated several meters above the congregation, I made a “statement of faith” in Jesus, of his perfect life, sacrificial death, and saving resurrection, and was dunked to applause.
As a Christian, I was supposed to believe well, and live differently as a result.
Early on in my parents’ ministry, I became worried about my Witness.
I became anxious that my Witness wasn’t good enough, that we would lose support as a family for not having a good enough Witness.
Instead of being a Witness for God or Jesus, I was a Witness for my own goodness, for family goodness; Witness, in essence, was Honor.
I could only be a high-jumper clearing the highest good-boy bar.
As I plugged into extracurriculars, I found a way to clear more than one bar: the high bar of Son, the high bar of Student, the high bar of Camp Counselor and the high bar of Boy Scout.
What I sacrificed to achieve them was my sense of Self.
With this said,
and at the risk of my parents’ supposed “Witness,” I began to fall in love with boys the same time I began to fall in love with Jesus.
Everywhere I looked, everywhere I tried to please my family by having a good witness, to please God by being the right kind of fill-in-the-blank, there was a boy there.
Even in the mirror, I worried if I wanted the right things, if I presented the right way, and the boy, me, stood between me and things being perfect.
Mom used to say that I came out the womb smiling, and while I’m naturally optimistic, my parents were troubled when I didn’t show it on my face; they’d notice on my face when something was going on and ask.
Because I didn’t want to be a bother, or worry them, I practiced stretching the corners of my mouth so that when I relaxed my face, it would rest in a smile.
The ultimate poker face is one that outcheers the worry that there’s a reason to search beneath it.
Are You Governed Increasingly by God’s Word?
“I open my mouth and pant, longing for your commandments.” (Psalm 119) My parents, being Baptist missionaries, are part of a transformational project—is it radical wealth redistribution or neocolonial? Even my dad admits it’s a little bit Marxist to ask for money from white conservative Christians and spend it on free food for a dozen Nicaraguan cities.
Jesus said, “Truly, I say to you, there is no one who has not left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or lands…” (Mark 10) But who leaves whose house, and what land do they go to when they leave?
Dad is the kind of missionary who doesn’t want to be pinned down on anything but the Bible.
As a teacher, he prefers the classical models of education, the Socratic method, which depends on posing questions and playing a Devil’s advocate to disprove and disprove someone in the effort of improving their thinking.
The problem with these two approaches, Biblical belief and Socratic inquiry, is that even though my Dad does have opinions, asking only questions without teaching the answers doesn’t necessarily resolve in a son who believes the same way you
do.
It wasn’t until graduate school that I realized that many of my morals and values could be actually triangulated along three lines: the values I learned at home from my parents, the values I learned from American/Nicaraguan Culture in regular and online life and in Boy Scouts, and the values I learned from my Bible or at the missionary school, Nicaragua Christian Academy.
At the intersections of these were “Southern or American family,” “Cultural Christianity,” and “Christian family,” which I might have learned from my extended family, the Bible camp I started attending in middle school, and other missionaries, respectively.
At the center is a small cohort of semi-ubiquitous values I learned from all of my activities.
For instance, I learned to value nature from every angle: my dad, the Boy Scouts, Camp Gilead, and my generation of Americans have all shown concern for the environment and its conservation.
Dad knows that the Bible values charity, utter financial self-sacrifice, and collectivism, even the abhorrence of corrupt financial systems, but because he got it from the Bible, he would never be a “Socialist.”
•••
Nicaragua Christian Academy was not so different from Lakeland Christian or Sojourn, both of which I’d been going to before we finally arrived in Nicaragua.
The curriculum was as general as any, but many of our textbooks came from Christian publishers, like Bob Jones University Press.
The only differences we perceived at the time were the Bible verses spread throughout small text boxes in the corners of humanities textbooks, and special notes for major Christians and religious progress in the history books we read.
What was unique about NCA was its demographic makeup: the school, when it had started in the 1990s, had been dedicated to all missionary kids, but it wasn’t a boarding school like other missionary fields often ran.
NCA would never turn away a missionary kid, but there was a waitlist for foreign nationals and local Nicargauans, many of whom in the middle class could afford to enroll their children privately.
Many of the children who went to NCA were American, Canadian, or Korean missionary kids, and the rest were Nicaraguan, Costa Rican, or so on, sometimes the children of NCA employees.
Instruction was in English, but NCA was accredited as well by the Nicaraguan Education Ministry, and offered mandatory Spanish classes and high school credits so that students would be able to attend college in either North America or Nicaragua.
NCA had peer schools across Managua, often tied to language and nationality.
The American Nicaraguan School was more familiar with expatriate Americans and Embassy kids, and then there were the French school, the German school, and Lincoln, the prep school.
We played their teams in sports, faced them at the debate conferences I attended in high school, but beyond this had a lot of camaraderie.
NCA, however, was the missionary kid school, and was chock-full of other MKs from around the hemisphere, and there was often turnover as new missionaries moved to the field, returned home to fundraise on a months-to-year-long break called Furlough, or returned home for good.
In both the US and in Nicaragua, evangelical Christians debated what Bible was the best for evangelism work.
When Emma and I enrolled at NCA, we showed up in our white-polo, navy blue-bottom uniform, with pencils, notebooks, and a New International Version Bible packed into our bags.
As the tides of American Christian culture changed around sixth grade, the school began making a gradual change to the English Standard Version, the supposed “better,” but didn’t require that everyone give up their NIVs for a three-year transition period.
The difference in translation is real— the NIV favors a paraphrase where the ESV favors the most literal translation at a readability that other literal translations hadn’t achieved yet.
The biggest impact it had on anyone at NCA was the difference in Bible memory, the fact that I have Luke 2 from Sunday School memorized in KJV, Hebrews 11 from 6th grade in NIV, and 2 Cor 4 in ESV.
Figure 6 : “The Talk,” Tempo 1
Because my family took a furlough when I was in fifth grade, I missed my class’s first “talk,” and got it with my dad instead.
I was back in seventh grade, though, to get the second sexual education class with Mr.
Karel Norman, a missionary high school PE teacher.
He was both the best and worst person to teach sex-ed: a former pastor, Norman was ripped, and he loved having sex with his wife, which he told us from the outset of our little charla (chat).
“Sex is a wonderful thing,” he said to us, “when you have it, it’s the best.”
Are You More Loving?
“To love your neighbor as yourself is more important than all burnt offerings and sacrifices.” (Mark 12) I am a person who wishes to love, and who was carefully taught not to love certain persons certain ways (“Anyone who looks at a woman lustfully…”, Matthew 5), and I didn’t.
My hands, hours after swim time at Bible camp, feigned the motions of obedience (because, “If your eye causes you to stumble…” Mark 9).
But I have to ask: am I allowed to answer this question, honestly? “—the Spirit of Truth.
The world cannot accept him.” (John 14) Yeah, I think I am more loving.
More than plenty of people.
What a stab in the back, a shot to the heart.
This should’ve been the first question.
Truly, truly, I say, it is easier to measure the progress of my love towards my loved ones than toward a stranger.
“The greatest of these is love.” (says 1 Corinthians 13 + a billion plywood plaques) My Scripture’s been adapted into vaguely dystopic worship-music videos.
Tell me not to love someone, some thing, some way.
I will find another, every time.
It was confusing though, to begin to have feelings for boys at school, in Scouts, and at Camp Gilead, where boy-to-boy friendship was both completely assumed but boy-on-boy crushing was completely undiscussed.
At school, boys crashed into one another playing sports, tackled each other, tickled each other, and for my witness’ sake I knew to be obedient and keep my hands to myself long before I knew that not doing that was either fine or could get me in trouble.
My parents gave me privacy when I changed, so I took that privacy when I changed in and out of my PE clothes, not knowing that it might be normal to change in front of other boys.
What were all in certain ways mature ways for my parents to cultivate my habits somehow rerouted in an opposite circular way, in the reverse of how my parents themselves experienced life.
Dad wore just shorts around the house, but I learned to cover up.
Mom and Dad had grown up playing sports, but though I was agile and barefoot as much as I could be, I didn’t prefer to use those skills in soccer.
I was interested in the kinds of activities that happened in my books, the fighting sports like archery, sword fighting, and strategy, and played plenty of set-up, knock down, with my nerf guns, my Legos, and the many board and card games our family picked up.
These were not necessarily popular among the boys at school (Se
Mok got me, because he did Tae Kwon Do), but every guy came to my paintball birthday parties in upper elementary school when I invited them all halfway up the hill from the school towards my house.
I remember feeling during the game that even though we were on teams, I was alone thinking strategically, alone in trying to flank the other team, and alone on my way out through the netting when I got shot.
The real difference was that the boys in my class had been at NCA since Pre-K, and I was the New kid until enough of the old guard, like InYong and SeMok and Joshua, moved away, Jake Knox from Costa Rica arrived and (later) returned from furlough, and I put my books down and took an interest in real socializing.
In middle school, when Kelsey and Gabriel at school finally picked up that “gay” was a perfect insult, it was easier for me to retreat into my goodness than to fight it.
If I were the perfect Christian, the best at Bible memory, the most involved, no one would ever suspect.
At camp and in Scouts, I had other tactics.
In my Scout troop, I had an easy target to deflect, and as one of the two oldest boys, I would call Galio, a boy from the French school who was shy, had long bangs, and had a body I compared to the LMFAO “Sorry for Party Rocking” album cover, Gay-lio, which my friends went along with.
Calling someone gay wasn’t allowed at Camp, because we had a color-code for gendered contact: red (girls) plus blue (boys) was purpling, and not permitted.
In my first cabin experience, at 14, I shared a room with a younger boy who we all thought might be lactating, and he was the butt of the joke for two days before two other guys in my cabin decided to rebel against the no-Purpling rule by dark-blueing, instead.
As they cuddled up against one another in the same bunk, to the chagrin of my counselor Caleb, who was trying his best not to entertain what he clearly understood was funny, I felt a twinge of jealousy.
It was the same summer that I first encountered the word homosexuality in the Bible, likely in 1 Corinthians or somewhere that prohibits it.
Being as obsessed with being good as I
was at the time, I was comforted with all of the systematic theological structures my Dad had pushed me to construct over after-dinner table devotions.
He’d given me a moral framework for what I’d call “my struggle” until after I graduated from high school: that I am homosexual, but, as 1 Cor.
says, “such were some of you.
But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.” I was freed.
As long as I kept my hands to myself, I’d be good.
I devoted myself, like the book said, to Jesus: “‘All things are lawful for me,’ but not all things are helpful.
‘All things are lawful for me,’ but I will not be dominated by anything…” I tried not to be captivated by the dimples in the lower back of a boy in another cabin as he climbed up the trampoline that floated on the surface of the lake we all swam at together; I kept my shirt on at swim time; I averted my eyes when my friend and senior counselor, Myles, the head lifeguard who was enrolled at military school, stood up on the lifeguard chair and whistled for everyone to come into shore.
Myles had a crew cut, a huge chest, and a heavy brow; he was strong and smart but kind, too.
I wanted to be around him, to be him, and him himself; I settled, in the long run, for becoming like him.
In college, I became head counselor, head lifeguard, senior counselor for other boys; I ran a tight ship in my cabins.
I kept the same profile at school, being as good and involved in religious activities as I could to maintain a reputation that was at once goody-two-shoes, teacher’s-pet,
homework-comparer, and spiritually-knowledgeable.
This also insulated me from what I perceived as bad behavior: my reputation was such not that I would tell on someone, but that I was so solid that no one would think to offer me, for example, alcohol, or would presume that I might have a crush on many of the boys in class.
Are You More Sensitive to God’s Presence?
“Where can I go from your Spirit? Where can I flee from your presence?” (says Psalm 139): a seventh-grade Bible-memory challenge.
We do it for grades at the missionary school and points at Bible camp.
A monthly newsletter reports my family’s activities, scrubbed clean for the White churches keeping our budget at 89%.
“You whitewashed tombs!” (said Matthew 23) Nothing about the surveillance I leveled upon my younger sister, how when I corrected what she said wrong I told her I was “training” her, like a Twitter hawk.
It rubbed off on me as pre-online Millennial hyper-vulnerability culture.
I cast being ‘sensitive’ goodly, but now: how do I untrain Truman Show God’s camera, that red flashing light, from the back of my head?
Even though I was appropriately involved in Boy Scouts and in school by seventh grade, I was having a really hard time socially, especially with girls.
Middle school isn’t good for most kids, and it was hitting me and Emma hard.
NCA provided stability for a lot of MKs and their families, who created a tight-knit ball for the students, whose parents were all literally on different missions, for different denominations.
But, there were of course problems with a school that prioritized its mission over paying to hire and retain the best possible quality of teacher or system, as NCA would provide a stipend for “missionary teachers,” but not a full wage.
When I was in sixth grade I was being bullied by Karly and Lily, two other MKs.
I’d known Lily Thurlow, who was always taller than the rest of the class and had shoulder-length, dark hair and an upturned, sweet face like a bear, since third grade.
When I moved, we’d both been in Special Spanish together, where she’d given me the nickname Peter the Pesky Fly.
She, Jacob Knox, and I were close friends in fourth and fifth grade, when we nailed down our first inside joke, a rusty meat grinder we found in the back of Jacob’s back yard.
We vowed, Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants-style, to polish and wax the meat grinder back to working function, and to pass it between one another, to take selective custody.
For me, it was a symbol of friendship that I could prove with the first two MKs in Nicaragua, outside of the ABWE “cousins,” who liked me.
By sixth grade, things were messy; Mrs.
Woughter, who outside of
school was my Aunt Cari, had a lame disciplinary system called the “Behavior Book,” which would get us detention if we had to write our names in it.
Karly and Lily didn’t care about having to sit, if first they could get me to chase them around the lunch room and the recess courtyard by taking my lunch and playing monkey in the middle with my lunchbox, then eating some of it.
I liked to run, but Lily was tricky, and Karly would go on to try out for the Junior Olympics, and got into competitive running for the Nicaraguan team in eighth grade: she was the best athlete almost hands-down in our class.
During this time, I had no reason to get on Emma; I was getting got on myself.
The next year, when Emma was in fifth grade, she had an Australian man named Mr.
B.
as her teacher.
Mr.
B’s daughter, Francesca, was in my class and took special Spanish, but Mr.
B.
had anger issues and was unqualified to teach the grade from top to bottom.
He ran his classroom like the Australian military, and addressed his students by their Alpha-Bravo-Charlie aliases, and would shout at his classroom when they got too out of hand.
Emma’s class wasn’t malicious, but they might have been much more social than academic, which was taken as a deep disrespect by Mr.
B, who also seemed to believe in collective punishment, which was a double loss because Emma and some of her friends, like Paola and Joscelin, whose siblings Alejandra and Juan where in my class, were some of the sweetest and most academically-dedicated girls in school.
Emma and my parents were stressed out trying to catch her up on the material Mr.
B hadn’t communicated well, and this may have been the beginning of Emma’s deeply self-motivated, hardworking spirit as well as her hard-shell exterior.
The last year, my seventh-grade year, was what broke me.
Though I was feeling a certain kind of way about some of the boys in my class, especially the new Korean student, Samuel, Karly had become my biggest crush.
At this point, she was a self-described tomboy, and except
that we were on different math tracks and had separate homerooms, our schedules overlapped a ton.
Both of us were enrolled in a recycled-materials art class, and would run through the high school wings collecting recycled plastic bags and rings from coke bottles to turn them into coasters, placemats, and so on.
At Spanish class, she and I would both laugh and joke during outside group work, and I’d reenact scenes from my favorite movie at the time, a Jim Carrey adaptation of A Series of Unfortunate Events.
Then, one afternoon, she ghosted me, and avoided talking to me for the rest of the semester.
I was broken; I slipped a letter in her desk before English class that she read and didn’t return asking her what was wrong, what I had done, and how I could fix things.
When I finally told my parents, I bawled about it in my room on the edge of my metal bunk bed, the overhead light on, Mom and Dad on either side of me.
By the time I finished crying, Dad stood in the doorway, and Mom rubbed my back tenderly, and I agreed with them that I needed some time off from school.
I homeschooled part-time for eighth grade, and in ninth grade, I went fully online.
My parents were on board because, having a late-July birthday, I was always the youngest in my class.
The next youngest was Jacob, who was three weeks older than me, but by the time we reached middle school, he was already grown-ish, because when we were in sixth grade and his family had taken a furlough back to Wisconsin, they had enrolled Jake in a public middle school.
Despite the similarity of our upbringings, I think how an MK schools on-field and during furlough will tell you more than nearly anything else about them, and while Jake matured in the US, I homeschooled, and took a slower route towards social adaptation.
I enrolled online with a Christian online school, Jubilee Academy, on the condition that I attended the NCA youth group, where I soon met other MK homeschoolers, reconnected with Natalie, and met who’d become one of my best friends and my first, long-term, in-love crush, Nate.
Figure 7: First Rain
Many-times-hand-washed white polo with the green trapezoid embroidered on the
left breast
Hidden beneath a red striped sweat- er / except for the collar, buttons, out-
lined chest
in ninety-five, feels like hundred- three weather / bulletin board calendar bets
rains best
chances of cooling earth to eight-
y nine / when it does, sidewalk rain lilies start from rest
and race to be first to drink the
spat droplets, though it runs brown off red striped roof closest
thing to salvation when white polo wants collision with another, rain washing
to est-
uaries beneath the lilies.
Do You Have a Growing Concern for the Spiritual and Temporal Needs of Others?
“So what do people get for all their hard work and anxiety?” (Ecclesiastes 2) Some Christians see the turns in roads as forks.
Does a body, does any body, deserve care? What juxtapositions: Spiritual vs.
Temporal. Existential vs. Time-bound. Meaning vs. Fate. Interpretation vs. Doom. My parents gave me a summer choice, every year between two benedictions.
“What does the Lord require of you?” (Micah 6)
Choice 1) Fly 1000 miles to Florida “to love and serve the Lord” at Bible camp.
Choice 2) Join the folks, canvassing Nicaraguan homes with people who left their homes to fly 1000 miles “to love and serve the Lord.”
The advantage we took of hospitality.
We call these “Teams.” What are Love and Service? “He has shown you what is good.” (Micah 6) Here’s a smug, wry equivalence from your speaker, sarcastic.
Love and Service is painting walls, singing in a language you don’t know, free candy.
The flipbook you use to show your American-dream house to a woman who scavenged plastic kiddie pool walls to make her own home.
In the 1950s, “Teams” were called “Crusades.” “Does not wisdom call out? Does not understanding raise her voice?” (Proverbs 8) We lack different things.
We learn different lessons in different orders.
Here, on a mission, you learn you are White.
I watch my sister sort acetaminophen by the dozen.
Though my parents’ ministry had grown regular and predictable, Camp Gilead was a place that my Bible nerdiness was welcome, and where I could make summer-long friends instead of many week-long ones.
Camp was built around cabin groups: 4 boys’ cabins, 5 girls’ cabins.
After having been a reader at recess in school, and a kind of geeky, introverted,
more-academic-than-social elementary-schooler, Camp put me out of my comfort zone, and into both community and conflict with tons of other boys in a structured, scheduled way.
At Camp, I had all the rules, and it felt like one of the only places that playing by the rules worked, because if I memorized Bible verses, I’d win hundreds of points for my cabin; if I cleaned my area well enough, we’d win Cabin Cleanup, which meant we got served food first in the Dining Hall.
Where at home, right behavior was expected, at Camp, right behavior was rewarded.
Mom developed an aphorism that she’d repeat when Karly ghosted me, when I fought with other students or had classmates I disliked, and even used on me when I needed to be corrected: Everybody matures over the summer.
I think this ethic comes out of her teaching
experience—when you’re around children every day for nine months, the difference day-to-day doesn’t seem like much, but a three-month respite reveals huge movements in personality, physical growth, and temperament in the teenage years.
Camp also gave Emma time apart from me, and took me out from underneath my anxiety about witness, except for a week every other summer that my parents might be invited to speak as the guest missionaries at the Bible lessons between breakfast and game time.
My first summer as a camper I lived in 4A, but then I volunteered as a kitchen worker to get community service hours.
The other kitchen workers weren’t missionary kids, but some were ministry kids, the children of pastors or deacons, and they were usually other Christian school and homeschool kids like me.
We had a shared frame of reference, shared values, and had an easy goal to work toward each day: serving food, washing dishes and kitchenware, and sweeping the sand out of the Dining Hall and the chapel twice or three times a day.
We were often so busy that I barely had time outside of work, Bible times, and the games we’d sometimes get to play, that I didn’t even have time to imagine a summer romance, even though there were counselors and other campers that I found attractive.
By the end of the summer, junior counselors started dropping out of camp to prep for fall school and sports.
Kitchen workers like my friend John and I, both homeschooled ministry kids, were brought up to be junior counselors in training.
My senior counselors entrusted us with leadership over other boys, to walk the cabin from place-to-place and invited us to take spiritual leadership, too.
Even if I didn’t always know what I believed about how I felt, I felt safe, because I knew the right thing to say, and I knew that even if one day I might disclose to someone the feelings I had, those people trusted that I loved Jesus, and they knew me too deeply to stereotype me or fear me.
I finally had friends, friends I served others with, friends I trusted to care for me.
Figure 8 : “The Talk,” Tempo 2
Before camp, though, I had just joined a chapter of the Boy Scouts of America that was HQ’ed at the United States Embassy.
Because of the BSA’s really bad history with child abuse in the 1970s, 80s, and 90s, when I joined around 2010, they had a robust child protection policy program that my dad and I had to participate in within the first few months.
In “A Time To Tell,” we watched three case studies in which male molesters get too close to a boy my age: a boy’s uncle has his nephew over to watch a movie, a coach invites a boy for personal physical training, and an older boy has a house party and invites a drunk younger boy into his room.
The video content on its face was professional, informative, and necessary, but at age 12, I worried that because I had crushes on boys, I could be perceived like that older peer, that anything I did to get close to another boy could be perceived as leery or grooming.
It made me anxious about having friends over, and worried to share too much with anyone about how I felt.
How did I know to be worried; where did that come from? In evangelical circles, we call it the Billy Graham rule, the Modest Manifesto.
When I got to college, it was rebranded the Mike Pence rule: never allow a male leader to be alone with a woman.
It got back to the idea of Witness, that it could unbecoming, a he-said-she-said situation, or, back to that old original Sin doctrine, that a man without integrity could be tempted by privacy with another woman and act out of order.
My dad practiced this rule: if it was ever raining really hard, Dad would drive Acuzena home from our house so that she didn’t have to walk or commute uphill in the rain from our neighborhood to hers.
For propriety’s sake, I or Emma would ride in the car with them, so that there could be no suspicion.
There were other reasons behind this behavior; the Billy Graham Rule comes out of a kind of negotiation between manhood, womanhood, and the Bible.
1 Peter says, “Keep your conduct among the Gentiles honorable, so that when they speak against you as evildoers, they may see your good deeds and glorify God….” There were also sad stories of how impropriety ruined a ministry, and a sort of awareness of how “the Enemy,” Satan, could use sexual misconduct to tear apart a team.
One of the single missionaries on our team had been asked to disband from ABWE because she was seeing someone outside the boundaries of marriage, and later, sexual impropriety sent another missionary family home.
I applied the rule to the people I had crushes on, and so my anxieties about being “found out” meant that by the time I was 17, I didn’t really have many friendships with other boys that weren’t either in a group setting or in a structured activity.
I had lots of guy friends at school, but I didn’t go over to their houses except for birthdays.
The people whose houses I did go over to, we had friendships that stayed outside of anyone’s bedroom: we’d play board or video games, or go outside to shoot a bow and arrow or throw a frisbee.
I made sure to keep things that way; I always wanted a Witness, whether it was someone’s housekeeper, parent, or sibling—I was afraid of privacy.
Do You Delight in the Bride of Jesus Christ?
“Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth!” (Song of Solomon 1) Isn’t it kinda gay that I’m gonna marry Jesus? (I know; I’m not the first to make this joke.
The mystics, those poets, they get it.
“Batter my heart, three-person’d God.” (said John Donne)) That’s not the question.
Bride in question (Bridezilla, iykyk), is “the” Church.
My first front tooth I lost in a blue-carpeted church basement.
The dark room, Veggietales.
A puppet show.
Elaborate Vacation Bible Schools pre-ordered from Concordia Supply were held up in Nicaraguan customs offices.
Again, we weighed ends and means—bribes, the “holy one, a messenger, coming down from heaven.” (Daniel 4) At church, a thunderstorm wailed down on two panes of zinc roofing.
Pastors start a competition in drowning between it and their mic and speaker system.
“The rain came down… and the winds blew and beat against that house.” (Matthew 7) Every verse prophecy, every past present.
Is a church a church if it has a drum kit instead of a choir? Is a church a church if it’s a school instead? Is a church a church if the pews are plastic chairs? “Where two or three gather in my name...” (Matthew 18) I know a dozen boys named Jesus, and it’s not weird unless you make it weird.
(Americans always make it weird.) This is my Jeremiad.
The thunderstorms are tears, and the thunder angels bowling.
The lighting: Jesus’s camera flashing—again He is watching.
Do I delight in a man who tells my father the only Bible inspired by God is in English, and we may not use another? Do I delight in knowing my father’s sermons by heart? They go like this:
Are the Spiritual Disciplines Increasingly Important to You?
The Setting is outside of time, or circa 3200 years ago.
There’s an apparition to a man doomscrolling.
A Calling and a Rejection (Steps 2 & 3 in the Hero’s Journey).
My parents’ 2nd & 3rd family ‘Bibles’ come from England, from old-language translators.
In them, God is a Lion, or God made the world with Song.
Children or children-sized adults make the difference.
“Tell it to your children, and let your children tell it to their children, and their children to the next generation.” (Joel 1)
God allows A SIGN.
& A SIGN.
& A SIGN.
& A SIGN.
“Some spiritual gift to make you strong—” (Romans 1) Jars of Clay, clashing, crashing trumpets: are the triumph of this sermon and an alt-rock band my father sewed into the helix of my ear.
My mother speaks to the women, the wives—because here we gender the testimony of God— “Want to stay, willing to go, or willing to stay, want to go?” So we pack up our fleeces.
My favorite judge was left-handed, like me.
The Word from God was a sword, lost in my belly.
The paradoxes of Christian sexual teaching, like that marriage one of the most exclusively regulated parts of the faith, but also at the core of the Christian narrative as a relationship between God and His Church, produces some cultural paradoxes at the fringe of the
actual theological teachings.
One of the most obvious, at least in the Christian missionary community, is that as long as you held to the traditional Biblical sexual ethic, very few people would question your masculinity or femininity, because they were tied to that ethic, rather than to various kinds of gendered practices.
In my experience, some of the most traditional marriages, in which the adults espoused a “complementarian” view of the sexes (which means that “male and female God created them,” “of one flesh” but of two roles), were also the most practically egalitarian.
In my family, Mom handled almost all of our family and ministry finances, and Dad cooked several nights a week.
Dad almost never raised his voice at us, and both he and Mom had a voice at team meetings.
Even though Mom swears that in a disagreement, she “submits to her husband” as the Bible tells her to, they dispute and dialogue over many aspects of social, financial, religious, educational, and ministry life.
They’re a united face to other people, with Dad as “the head,” but in practice they’re quite equal to one another.
And while Dad was whom I did Boy Scouts with and talked to about puberty, Mom is the more socially-sensitive; she’s who dressed me and told me to firm up my limp wrist.
That’s something gay people do, she said, and you don’t want people to think that about you, right? She did the same thing when I put my hands on my hips with my thumbs forward instead of backward, and she’s why when my hands are loose, I cross them behind my back instead of my front.
Though they encouraged me to be self-conscious about how I presented, they would also correct my self-consciousness: once, when I was going into ninth grade, we booked a beach house for the weekend.
Up through middle school, I had worn a shirt or a rash guard to go swimming; for people as white as we are, it made sense to prevent burns, even though it made for a hard farmer’s tan.
But this trip, my dad forbade me from wearing a shirt.
He said I had to get comfortable with not wearing it, with people seeing my chest and stomach.
I was allowed to
be embarrassed that weekend, maybe safe to be embarrassed around just Mom, Dad, and Emma, but I was angry.
It felt like my own version of what all the MK girls went through at school, which had a much more rigorous dress code for women than for men.
Emma, as most of the girls at NCA did, was at the mercy of a Christian modesty code for girls that forbade any tighter clothing or shorter short or skirt during school hours.
For Emma, who was growing, and for my friend Naomi, the tallest girl in our class at 6 foot 2, and for many of the Nicaraguan girls in my class, their ability to shop for uniform clothes couldn’t keep up with the standards for skirt and short length, but most of the teachers didn’t care.
It was our high school principal, an aged South Carolinian named Susan Hall, who would interrupt class and dress code students during school, then at recess, and send them to change into clothes that the Nurse, my classmate Jessie’s mom Mrs.
Bonilla, had in her office.
Often, those “substitute clothes” fit worse than what the girls had on, and a long rivalry between my sister and Mrs.
Hall started.
It was bad for our relationship, too, that I could do no wrong in Mrs.
Hall’s eyes: I was a small group leader, a thinner, not-too-tall boy, a youth group leader, a student rep on the Spiritual Leadership Committee, class President, and a class speaker when the juniors and seniors took over our weekly chapel session once a year.
Boys, more effeminate ones, could get away with anything if they served Jesus enough.
Figure 9 : The Talk, Tempo 3
I had friends, friends I served with, but I never felt I could say anything to them about how I felt.
Some of them I knew had crushes on my girl friends, and others I questioned but didn’t want to out myself on, because there was no way to avoid someone at NCA; we took every class together.
Instead, I contented myself to my imagination.
Around tenth grade, I had my birthday party at a waterpark called HertyLandia, and invited my four most attractive guy friends to come celebrate.
I knew how to get my way in the most excusable way possible.
Yet, there were some questions I couldn’t answer, and some conversations started to become unavoidable.
Jacob went on Furlough again in Ninth grade, and came back for tenth grade from public school in the US with much more cultural knowledge than any other MK had.
He was the first person I knew who tried to come out as bisexual to his peers at NCA, and we all shut him down.
It was socially dangerous to say such things, and you could be asked not to come back the subsequent school year if you talked too much or made too much trouble.
One time, Jake ran his mouth after school about celebrity sex tapes, and though I had been told a lot about pornography being wrong from the jump at NCA, we oddly had never had any conversations
about masturbation.
Jake’s case study meant I finally had a segue to ask my dad, even though I had… partaken in both since middle school.
After explaining the context of the situation to Dad, I asked my strategic question:
“I know Jesus says that to picture someone with lust is a sin, and it’s the same as actually committing sexual sin with them.
But is there a way to … you know, without sinning? Like if I did it without picturing someone else, would it be okay?”
There was a pause before he responded.
“I don’t… have a clear yes or no answer for that, but I think that’s a question you need to ask between you and God,” he said.
For all my self-restraint socially and interpersonally, I had an active imagination and an iPad with internet access.
Usually, I was up extremely late, as my dad often was himself, playing computer games like Civilization, Bejeweled Blitz, or Command and Conquer.
When I got home in the afternoon from school and extracurriculars, I’d take a nap before dinner, and finish homework afterward before going on my electronics in the evening.
I had a few places I could sit where no one could sneak up on my screen, and I’d watch Glee or YouTube in my beanbag in the corner of the room.
But sometimes, after finishing through the comic books my dad and I both enjoyed, I’d look up fan-fiction on Archive of Our Own and load enough on my iPod to take to my room upstairs.
I only overheard my parents consummating their marriage once, or at there was only one time I realized that’s what it was.
We were on furlough in ninth grade, and we lived in a
45-and-older community that we were renting in on a technicality, since Heritage’s Mission House was full.
I was in the kitchen near the WiFi, loading content onto my iPod to take back to my room, when I heard kissing more sustained than s
Do You Still Grieve over Sin?
“Have I not wept for those in trouble? Has my soul not grieved for the needy?” (Job 30) Sin was the first fact I learned after my existence.
Its meaning: “missing the mark”—for all our good intentions, we all have bad aim with bows, arrows, and metaphors.
It’s on page 2
(Genesis 3) Jesus cried a bunch; did you know that? He wept and bellowed with anger at Lazarus’s tomb.
I wasn’t taught to do that.
Which Commandment was it that demands composure from me?
Up until my senior year of high school, the only crushes Mom and Dad knew of mine were Karly and my friend Maggie, a sandy-haired, shorter MK from Seattle.
Maggie had a heart-shaped face and is one of the most tender-hearted people I know, and we had been friends since she came to NCA in seventh grade.
She and I served on all the same youth teams, on the band, and in class leadership.
I’d taken the steps with Maggie that were expected of a boy my age: ask her father, then ask her, if I could ask her out, but then she politely and kindly declined my invitation to the movies and to the Spring Banquet, or “Not-Prom.” I did like Maggie, but I didn’t think about her the way I thought and dreamed about the other boys around me; I wanted
to be partners with Maggie, but I didn’t imagine us making out.
It was confusing for me, too, but it also felt like the only appropriate way to like a girl given how I was raised.
Any thought of Maggie that bordered on the sexual was supposed to be suppressed, right?
After Maggie shut me down romantically, she and I joined a talk therapy group of four kids from my class who all had a shared mentor, Mike Rumley-Wells.
Mike was one of the few progressive Christian missionaries on the field in Nicaragua, and had quickly become a star among students for his compassion and energy, for coaching basketball, and for being rough around the edges, a wiry, body-odored athlete, a guy’s-guy.
Mike is an author and writer, too, and was more vulnerable than most of his peers about his own struggles with his father, who suffered severely from Bipolar Disorder, and with insomnia.
Separately, Mike mentored Maggie, me, and
our friends Julia and Gabriel.
Each of us brought something different to our dinners in a coffee shop equidistant from our houses, almost all of them related to our relationship to our parents’s decisions, mental health, treatment of us, and so on.
I came out to the members of this group, “Legitimate Issues Support Party,” or LISP, before I came out to my parents.
I came out strategically.
It was either Good Friday or Easter, and I asked my parents to sit down on our back porch to talk.
I sat in the hammock, across from the two of them.
“I feel like I can tell you this, and I wanted to tell you tonight because it was on my mind, because it’s Easter, because Jesus died for all of us and for all our issues, and one of my issues is, something I’ve been struggling with, is that while I have crushes on girls, and I like Maggie, I have crushes on boys, too.”
My dad nodded a tiny bit, either as if he’d been waiting for me to say it, or as if he was just processing, but I think he had his suspicions.
Mom asked me a few questions, but I reassured her: “This is just something I’ve been wrestling with, and I knew that because you both believe in forgiveness, and that you love me no matter what, that I could tell you.”
I didn’t tell them that I’d come out to Emma already, and that she’d told me not to tell them.
She knew what they believed, as I did, about homosexuality, but I wasn’t interested in hiding anymore.
It didn’t make sense, for some reason, but because I was choosing to go to a secular college in my hometown, in Lakeland, around that time, instead of the four other Christian colleges I’d been accepted to, I needed them to know, to trust me now.
I told them I was excited to be near to Heritage, our home church, and to connect with the youth pastor I knew only sort of well.
They both held composure, but three days later (iconically), when I was doing dishes, Mom accidentally knocked my iPod off the counter onto the tile floor, and it cracked.
“I’m so,
so, sorry,” she said, and then her face welled up into a sob.
She ran out of the kitchen and into the play room in the back of the downstairs, the room below my bedroom, and sat on the twin guest bed, crying.
Dad went in after her, to comfort her, and I went in soon after.
“I just don’t know if there’s something I should have done differently,” she said, “I wish you hadn’t been struggling with that by yourself; we could have helped you sooner.”
“It’s okay, Mom,” I said, “I’m telling you now.”
What I didn’t tell them at the time was that I was still trying to theology my way through.
I needed the door to be open so that we could keep talking about this, but I needed them to be, even if they couldn’t be on the same page, at least in the same book.
They both started meeting with our next-door neighbors, the Sharpes, who were missionaries and directors of Nicaragua’s Young Life Camp in northern Nicaragua.
They had a gay son, an artist who lived in Hawai’i.
Like Bev and Larry helped acclimate my parents to Nicaragua, Danny and Anne helped my parents acclimate to their new understanding of me, and maybe answered some questions for them that would have been rude to ask me.
I too, would walk over to talk with Danny, who had been a Presbyterian pastor before joining Young Life.
Compared to Mike, he was more theologically conservative, but he had a frame of reference around my sense of self at the time that helped me feel like I wasn’t insane, that I had done the right thing to tell Mom and Dad.
Are You a Quicker Forgiver?
It’s a literary-size math problem: 70 x 7 = rhetorical hyperbole.
A T-shirt company devotes itself to brand parodies—a game director owns each of them.
In red: “Ketchup With Jesus,” in blue: “Mayo Light Shine.” (Matthew 5)
Jonah, the original Moby Dick, Prophet of the LordTM, was furious with God forgiving the Godless, crime-filled city.
“I knew you were gracious and compassionate, slow to anger, abounding in loving devotion.” (Jonah 4) It is a literary-size conflict: Man, forgive Man.
Man, forgive Society.
Man, forgive Self.
Man, forgive God.
I finally forgave myself at 17 in a hedge maze, a drizzle onto the page in tearsalt and freshwater.
I was reading that holy book, running into the same wall looking for a Door, or a Gate.
Soon after, NCA took a high school youth group retreat to that Young Life Camp in Matagalpa.
Provocatively, our chaplain, Mr.
House, had titled the speaker series Sex, Drugs, and Rock and Roll, and cleared with everyone’s families that this would be about the kinds of cultural issues that MKs might be faced with when they moved back to the United States, if we weren’t already facing them now.
I hadn’t had anything figured out still—I’d prayed all through middle school that God would take my attraction to boys away, tried to nail it to the cross, tried to burn it in a fire at Camp, tried to “goodness and leadership” my way out of any situation that could get me in trouble, done my best to avert suspicion.
One morning at the retreat, we walked through a hedge maze in the shape of a Celtic labyrinth, with mist dripping onto our open Bibles as we walked single-file, quietly.
I came across 2 Corinthians 4, to a place that says “But we have this treasure in jars of clay, so that the extraordinary greatness of the power will be of God and not from ourselves; we are afflicted in every way, but not crushed; perplexed, but not despairing…” I knew then that I didn’t have to prove myself to anyone, I didn’t have to be “good in spite of” any secret.
I was already made good in God’s eyes, because at the end of time, when God asks me to account for my life, I will claim Jesus as my own.
I didn’t have to hide any more.
I had to be realistic, though, about what it would mean to be “out” at my school, and I didn’t want to be misperceived in my class either as giving up my faith or as eschewing this truth
about my sexuality.
Though individually the teachers at NCA were by-and-large kind,
open-hearted, caring people, the culture at NCA was, literally, homophobic, afraid of anyone in the LGBT corhort being a part of the community.
I don’t think anyone knew what to do with anyone who might actually be gay who wasn’t easy to ostracize for being weird, obviously not a “believer,” or rebellious—but there also wasn’t a consideration at the time that, statistically, in every grade of 25 there would likely be 1-3 queer students.
Now, some MKs remain sheltered through high school, having never seen the Harry Potter films for fear of witchcraft or, like in my family, any horror, so much of the senior Bible class curriculum is preparatory for the re-entry of missionary kids and expats to their home countries.
Where would we live? What would people think of us? What would ‘the world’ expect us to be? We had a whole section on “homosexuality,” the rising cultural issue since the Supreme Court decision legalizing gay marriage.
Mr.
Starkenburg, who taught on a strictly-timed lesson plan, set a timer for 5 minutes.
“Break into groups and talk to your partner and the groups nearby you: would you want a gay student at NCA to participate in leadership?”
I exchanged glances with my partner, Kaki, who I’d done debate with for three years.
Kaki, a blonde Canadian who became an economics policy major in Ontario, was a budding liberal, and in many ways was already over the religious morality games that we’d played at NCA for a decade.
We shrugged our shoulders, and then Jessie, our salutatorian, leaned back in her chair and let us know that she was strongly opposed.
I hadn’t come out yet to my parents; this was the fall semester, and it wasn’t until Spring, when Mike took over Senior Bible the second semester, that I had a choice to make.
When Mr.
Star posed that question, I realized something—of everyone I knew, no one would be change the experience of life for gay kids at NCA other than me.
I had personal
relationships with Mr.
Star, who was the school director, and with Mr.
House, our youth group leader and school chaplain.
Star was a missionary and long-term NCA Eagle: he’d moved to Managua to teach computers at NCA before he met his wife, another teacher, had several kids together, and then taken on administrative leadership.
Mr.
House, who was from San Diego, had the easy-going California nature but was clear-eyed about what teenagers really needed, and what experiences they were really having, compared to the moral panics that swept through the parent body every so often.
Once I’d come out to my parents, I told Dad and Mike that something had to be said.
Even though I wouldn’t be able to change NCA’s policies or statement of faith, which is only affirming of traditional marriage, I had to suggest to my teachers and mentors that they change how the subject of LGBT issues was talked about.
At the time, LGBT issues were perceived as something going on in America, outside of the school system, as a hypothetical moral problem.
But by April of my senior year, I had become cognizant that students in the grades above, below, and much below me shared my same identity category.
I called a meeting, and sat down in Star’s office with Dad, Mike, and Mr.
House, and made my case.
I had the relationships with each of them that meant I wouldn’t be laughed out of the room, and my vulnerability became a tool so that an honest conversation could be had about how to account for a reality—my very existence— they had been inconsiderate of up to then.
Do You Yearn for Heaven and to Be with Jesus?
“The Son of Man has no place to lay his head.”(Matthew 8) To my sister, our pasts are behind us.
She will not be called “missionary kid.” She has translated enough empty promises, waved for cameras.
She’s done being petted for being blonde and a darling Christian daughter.
But prophecy is written present tense.
I want you to ask me about me.
I watch her now.
I watch me now: This essay is a Biblically-accurate angel.
Trodding door-to-door down dirt cobble road past wood-post fences, like groups of Whites panhandling the Spirit in broken language.
After listening politely, Nicaraguan women go back to sweeping the hard ground free of its dust.
I am apophatic: Heaven is not a cloud.
I am cataphatic: It is a city.
I am syllogistic: If there are trees and rivers and clothes in that heavenly city, that kingdom of glass and gates, won’t I have a body? “Let the one who is thirsty come, and let the one who desires the water of life drink freely.” (Revelation 22) Given there is no temple, sun, moon, closed gates, or tears, tell me, too, no money.
But to answer the question: of course.
(Hebrews 11) of course.
(2 Corinthians 5) of course.
(Psalm 61) of course.
(Philippians 1)
Since high school, Witness has taken on a much richer meaning.
I want work and life to take more of a poetic approach than a representational one, and I think of Witness as an imperative in the face of everything in the world that would make us forget the truth.
Witness is a shield, memory a sword.
“To remember is resistance,” I heard Jesmyn Ward say recently.
My Witness is a reminder to myself that wherever I live, the experiences I had are real; that who I am is not a reinvention, but a reminder, of my past.
I’ve been drawn to men and to Jesus for more than a decade now, and I still don’t have things all figured out.
I believe that there’s a place for me in the Faith, and I want to honor my God, but there have been a lot of barriers between me and a kind of peace about how to best do that.
There’s a lot going on in Church culture more broadly, and Dad has taken up a kind of allyship of his own—at the Institute of Church Planters, he took a stand and suggested church should be a place that LGBT people feel welcomed to, which made many Nicaraguan pastors, who are in ways more conservative than American ones, bristle.
I keep in touch with kids like me, the NCGays; I remind them they’re not alone; and I hope things are better for them now than before, that they are welcomed rather than invisible.
HOW FOREIGN NATIONALS ARRIVE TO NICARAGUA & THE LAND THEY INHABIT or, NUMBERS
INTRO SEQUENCE
Welcome to Nicaragua, the Land of Lakes and Volcanoes! While here, you will take a
multi-stage tour of the country, traversing several biomes, elevations, habitat systems, and urban environments.
You and your party seek to develop skills that will be useful for you and your sons for the rest of your lives, so along the way, you will complete challenges and minigames that help develop your sense of what it means to be in this place, to be on this journey, together, and to be a man…
CHOOSE YOUR CHARACTER
First, you must build your Troop.
There are several types of characters to choose from, each of them unique but equipped with different skills: Expatriate, Diplomat, and Missionary are the main four classes of characters to choose from.
An expatriate, a diplomat, and a missionary are not so different.
Take Don, Brian, Oscar, & Bruce:
THE EXPATRIATE
Don is an expatriate.
He is an American who married into a Nicaraguan family, which is actually a German expatriate family who has been in Nicaragua for long enough to have sieved into the grain of the nation to be called such.
The generational differences between Don’s family members are mainly linguistic: his father-in-law speaks German and Spanish, while his wife speaks Spanish, Don himself speaking it as his second language, and his children being raised on both, homeschooling in English but living in Spanish.
Do not ask too closely about the date of
his father-in-law’s immigration, but be grateful you have access to an heir of a quaint but large and profitable resort in a mountain city north of the capital.
CUSTOMIZE (#1)
There are more versions of Don: There is a Canadian barber who moved to Nicaragua to “escape” the shelter-in-place orders imposed by his government.
There is a Korean father who works as a manager in a clothing factory on the outskirts of town, whose family all dress like lifestyle outdoors-people.
There is a Jacques, a French engineer, whose wife has a bowl cut, maroon lipstick, and two sons who attend the French school on the south east side of Managua.
There is Jeff, a high school administrator who takes positions at various international schools as he wishes—his sons were born in Cambodia, but they were raised in California before they moved to Nicaragua.
THE DIPLOMAT
Brian is a diplomat.
He is the head of the Marine unit stationed in the American Embassy in Nicaragua.
He has a buzz cut and is built like a cartoon of a marine chief, like Spike the dog character in Tom & Jerry.
He too is biracially married: His wife and family, which were able to move to Nicaragua with him (it is of less security risk than other stations allied to Nicaragua, like Iran and Cuba), are of part-Southeast Asian nationality.
They are all kind, but Brian is tough, hard, a natural leader but serious about discipline and paperwork (this will play to an advantage).
CUSTOMIZE (#2)
Previous men who have filled the role of the diplomat in this case study were Eric, a Mormon with gray hair, and a tall single man who is chief of security at the US Embassy when the Nicaraguan capital erupts in protest in 2018, but had been previously stationed
in Baghdad and Pakistan (for one-year terms, much shorter than the three-year terms allowed in nations with fewer security risks).
THE MISSIONARY
Bruce is a missionary with an independent Baptist organization that began relief work in Nicaragua after Hurricane Mitch, the year his son was born, and founded a camp and retreat center in 2007, 160 acres of land northwest of Managua.
This land will be one of your stops along the way.
Bruce has been balding since the nineties, but at 6 feet tall, most Nicaraguans can’t see the spot at his crown or how thin the top of his hair is when he’s standing up.
Before moving to Nicaragua, he and his wife taught at a Christian school, and his training as a biologist lives on in his garden, where he grows coffee, cocoa, wild blackberries, bougainvillea, plumeria, tends a birdbath, and grills.
When he became the director of the camp in 2009, he performed the booking, bookkeeping, maintenance, landscaping, and planning for future stages of the camp as more team members arrived.
CUSTOMIZE (#3)
Bruce’s team has shuffled the deck of character cards three times over the past 15 years: Larry, Andy, Mark 1, Steve, Richard, Pat, Dan, Jason, Mark 2.
Each man comes with a different temperament, a similar but varied origin story, and a skill of some kind.
Steve is an Engineer; Mark 2 is an Accountant; Larry and Andy are Experienced; Pat is a Doctor, Mark 1 is Learned.
Bruce is Learned, too, and an Outdoorsman.
SIDE CHARACTERS
These three categories—missionary, expatriate, diplomat—always blur, though.
For example:
SIDE CHARACTER #1
Liam is a missionary who has nearly-permanent residence in Nicaragua; he works as the computer scientist and director of a missionary school in the southwest side of Managua.
At the missionary school, he met his wife and had four children.
They have grown up in Nicaragua, his children, but in a way Liam too—he moved there when he was just in his twenties.
SIDE CHARACTER #2
David, a physician, is of Costa Rican nationality, but he and his wife were educated in the United States and lived in a neighborhood of Managua called Nejapa providing medical consultations and education to the surrounding people with a not-for-profit.
His three children also grew up essentially Nicaraguan, but they left for college like any expatriate, diplomat, or missionary kids might (to Harvard, Yale, and NYU, respectively).
SIDE CHARACTER #3
Liam’s boss, Eric, has been in Nicaragua even longer than Liam, and has built for himself and his growing family a square compound that is upgraded every few years.
From the outside, it is neutral-colored on a plot of undeveloped dirt, but the inside is bright and lush, courtyarded with running water and hammocks over tile.
SELECT YOUR VEHICLE
It is unique to nowhere as well that the cars in a place say plenty about their owners.
The missionaries I knew drove mostly second-hand cars that missionaries before them drove—in high-school, I drove a third-hand Jeep Cherokee, one of the only automatic transmission cars I knew of among my friends.
Its previous owners, the Keelings, had shipped it from the US when they moved, to my benefit, because though my parents had taught me to drive stickshift, they didn’t trust the roads enough to let me drive their cars there: one fewer foci in automatic.
SETTING INTRODUCTION
These three categories are not arbitrary.
They exist at the intersection of a reality of a certain kind of person: the kind that has the privilege to cross borders more easily than any Nicaraguan, and the kind of person that puts their kids in Boy Scouts.
BACKSTORY
These men take their sons on nature trips through the Boy Scouts of America, who have a place in Nicaragua because there is, technically, American land – the Embassy grounds.
When you cross through the car security checkpoints, your bumpers are swabbed for explosives and chemical residues and mirror-checked underneath the chassis.
As you swing open the 900-pound doors and send your belongings through the x-ray machine so you can emerge onto the Embassy plaza, you are effectively on US soil.
It is a high hill with an ambassador’s mansion on top, with a pool and a baseball field and a satellite tower.
According to now-deceased president of Venezuela Hugo Chavez, there is an earthquake generator underneath this hill, which overlooks all of Managua.
THE CATCH
Regardless of each of the characters you choose, each one comes with a boy.
They can be any man’s sons.
They can be all these men’s sons.
They can be any size.
You will play your characters, but by the end of your campaign they will have looked out the front flap of their tents onto the pacific ocean, five foot waves at the shore, late-eyed from the night before watching sea turtles and leatherbacks dig to lay their leather-eggs into the dark brown sand out of the sea, at the treeline where palms overlook the shore.
One will feel a rustle underneath his crush’s tent, and spied a hatchling peeking out from the lip.
He will yell at this and all the sons together with their fathers will watch the turtles wobble to the sea, standing over them as birds circle overhead.
They fathers looking at their boys, and the boys looking at these turtles, will have no thought than this: “This young, new one must be made ready to live.”
YOUR STORY BEGINS…
INTRO SEQUENCE (INSERT MUSIC)
A peanut-size spider tests the sleeping pad With two legs, twice as long as its others.
It’s looking for a way down, perhaps:
The cyclops fumbling for a way out.
Nobody has touched it, not the whole time
It licked its twice-long legs 1 micron at a time The RidgeRest is a buffet, a dip is a tray
And daddy has eaten his fill; on to backpack.
I had seen one in the outhouse, infinitely less Scary than the wasp bringing food home— Live food, which it had hunted, flown back:
Still stinging it, their struggle a new frequency.
The wasp took it into their panpipe home,
and it whistled still once the wasp had gone.
HOW I CAME TO UNDERSTAND MY PARENTS’ MINISTRY or, DEUTERONOMY
International Christianity.
As with every essay, I have to start with “When we moved to Nicaragua…” I started going to a different kind of church than the choired, carpeted, padded pewed, sanctuaried church of my childhood, the one that gave you a New King James Version of the Bible when you graduated from kindergarten Sunday School.
It was that way with almost all of the churches that we visited while my parents were fundraising, little Baptist churches in different suburbs in Florida, Georgia, Ohio.
Church basements with an indoor dodgeball tape marked out in quarters of red, blue, yellow, and green.
A parking lot with the same in paint.
Rooms with one big table, several kid-sized plastic chairs, idealized images of Noah’s ark floating on the waves (giraffes and elephants’ heads sticking out the top), and maps of Ancient Israel and the Mediterranean, maps of the first missionary journeys.
The bathrooms all smelled the same, with that pink hand soap they all had, sometimes with mints.
I lost my first front tooth in a church basement during a showing of VeggieTales.
My parents brought pieces of this with them to Nicaragua, but even their way of doing these things amended upon contact with Nicaraguan church culture, which was a mix of practices inherited from 20th Century missionaries, the Catholic church structure, and plain secular culture.
One of the most transferable pieces of American corporate Christianity was Vacation Bible School, which had been turned into a marketable program for purchase through online retail distributors like Concordia Supply.
In the early aughts, puppets were still a major medium for VBS—pre recorded CDs with lessons performed by the youth group leaders.
When we decided puppets were cheesy, digital content replaced it, underwritten by Christian publishing industries like LifeWay and Answers.
The former is a major evangelical publisher in Nashville;
the latter is the publisher behind the Creation Museum and the Ark Encounter, short for Answers in Genesis.
In Florida, the nearest Christian experience was the Holy Land Experience, a theme park with replicas of Solomon’s Temple, the Garden of Gethsemane, and the tomb of Jesus.
We took the VBS structure down to Nicaragua with us, but we didn’t seek to replicate the gimmicks of the roadside attractions—the average person here had no need or means to seek a
getaway-style entertainment from their church; they were busy doing real community work.
The first church we went to in Nicaragua was a house church in Nagarote, past Mateare, between Managua and Leon.
Our first time, the pastor asked if my mother would be interested in leading Sunday School for the children.
In a cultural miscommunication between my parents and the local pastor, this turned into a weekly position; my parents didn’t know when they said ‘yes’ that they were agreeing to a full-time responsibility.
My parents stayed there for quite a while, up to when they acquired a new church property, which was already the shell of a church.
There were walls, but no paved floors, and no roof, yet—shrubs grew out from underneath the Sunday school “room” where we laid out navy blue furniture blankets that provided enough of a surface to color in the lions in the story of Daniel with a RoseArt crayon.
We had a portable whiteboard with us that we used to teach a memory verse, erasing words one by one.
ROAD #5
What I see few of in the US is the microbus—the 22-seater with five or six aisles and fold-out aisleseats.
They’re so much smaller than American charter buses, because they have no undercarriage for luggage—they just take people, and a little stuff stacked between the back seat and the back hatch.
My friend Nicole’s dad runs a driving company our school contracted to bus students across town in the morning and on field trip days.
They have curtains, vinyl upholstery, dirty floors, no AC, and tall windows, open to the smog and sounds of traffic, to breeze and dust.





The experience of full microbuses (and, maybe, of Nicaragua in general) is always loud, always close, always a little bit sweaty.
A 100-pound high-schooler, I usually sat in a slanted aisleseat, hinges bent by past weight.
It was away from the window—the benefit of airflow risked diesel exhaust if stuck behind the wrong truck.
Once a hand thrust through the window, snatching a girl’s sunglasses off her head; another time the hand threw a palmfrond souvenir tossed in.
An overcrowded microbus hit my neighborhood wall once.
Blood dripped out of the shattered back.
Figure 11 : Stone Poem
When my father returns from the mines, he brings a scrap of the mountain,
an amberquartz like a jackfruit that hangs between a worker and his company’s gold.
The stones are implicated in everything, hiding everything inside themselves.
Animals hide in the names, like a labrador in a mineral, a cateye in an agate.
The animals themselves are sometimes there, petrified like a mollusk
older than my name.
I had rocks in my head at age fourteen, at my second birth.
Then I gathered my soul between the cliffs where I left my sandals.
On the beach I leave every urchin tucked in a rockpool.
Spending hours at the marketplace, I ask the price
of jewelry in the raw.
I say, How many is the cost? I say, How much is the value?
I get my last merit badge in the implications of stone,
in the distinction between firerock and the mineral crushed into itself until a transformation by a flood and the weight of the world.
Each has its use, for God and man alike.
The Father sends stones into the world to work, like the limestone
running under my feet and seaming the walls together and filling in between the rebar so that when the faultstones crack, the house stands witness to wisdom and a rock.
In sixth grade, I have a pet one with a mouth and eyewhites.
Like a fist, I keep the stone in my pocket until a recess
when my bullycrush throws it over the razorwire toward the slaughterhouse.
Stones are always near enough in time and amount for perishing:
numbered for the altars a firepillar dances on, stacked high enough
for the plummet of a swinelegion, numerous even for a Stevenstone of lawyers.
Once I find a geode along the roadside I drop it at my father’s command.
When the Father returns, it’ll open its mouth and life will pour out, no hammerstrike necessary.
I hear that if I’m silent, the rocks will sing.
ROAD #6
There were many parts of my life in Nicaragua where sound roared, engulfing.
The moments it rained so hard on our zinc rooftop that a TV with its volume turned to 100 was inaudible.
The roar of the Pacific Ocean blasting into volcanic rock.
The volume of the subwoofers at Baptist and Pentecostal churches, who believed that the whole neighborhood ought to be able to hear when church was beginning to worship.
The most frequent was when either of my parents’ cars drove any faster than 15 miles per hour over a plain, rocky, dusty, dirt road.
Our favorite places were reached by dirt: the beach, networked with dirt roads between secluded coves with either no development at all or an entire housing complex.
The maroon pumice gravel road tracing up from the end of the pavement up to the top of Volcan Masaya, and the wet mud layer on top of quarried rock in the two furrows climbing through cloud forest up to Selva Negra, the mountain cabin resort.
During the rainy season, cobble road runoff divots had reverse speed bumps, sometimes one big dip where the river washed right through.
HOW COLONIA BECKLIN CAME TO BE MY CHILDHOOD HOME or, JOSHUA
1.
When I was in fifth or sixth grade, we moved across the Pan-American Highway from the white two-story, embassy-recommended compound we had been robbed in, to a neighborhood called “Colonia Becklin.” Start at the entrance from South Highway, as it was called in Spanish, up the hill, past the Nueva Vida orphanage and renutrition center, past the guarded gate and double bars and speed bumps, past the Becklin mansion, and into the big circle on which most of the fourty or so houses sit.
A blank map of Colonia Becklin could be imaged as any one of these things: the proto-Siniatic letter A, the head of an ox.
A question mark with a huge bottom dot.
The head of a leaf-cutter ant with its antennae.
The Hundred Acre Wood, Backyardigans.
Tree bark, each unit with its own cell walls, surrounding a center tube, with branches off it.
When we moved, my parents shipped in special help like it was an episode of HouseHunters: International.
Mimi had been an interior designer in the 70s; she flew from Florida to help guide my parents in the choices and applications of paint and the positions of furniture.
Mimi had since long retired from interior design and from a frame shop by a Publix and moved into the multi-level marketing online greeting card business, but one of the best things about moving into Becklin was that Emma and I were given input into how we’d like our bedrooms decorated.
My room, which was on an upstairs corner, was three inches narrower than my sister’s, which was next to mine and had a private-access bathroom.
She called dibs on the bigger room, but mine got four times as much natural light.
And despite how dim her room was, Emma took it even further, choosing a color scheme that was teal, dark brown, and lime green, with zebra stripe accents.
I went with white, and black trim on a crossbeam and the baseboard,
because it would match my black metal bunkbed and my black-and-white desk and chair.
My bathroom wasn’t connected; it faced the hallway towards a window near the staircase that overlooked the red-painted roof of the large living room and its skylights.
CURB #1
The move into Colonia Becklin was smooth; we were able to settle, and we expected to grow up here.
Our Becklin house, like the Smiths’ had been, was chosen so that we could host better.
Our old house had a single downstairs office that tripled as a storage space and a guest room, and my parents foresaw that we would host prospective missionaries, interns, and family members, so they wanted to be able to do better than a mattress on the floor between two bookshelves and a fold-out six-foot plastic table with no closet.
In the Becklin house, we had two full guest bedrooms and bathrooms, a separate office, and a much larger back yard.
The house was open air, which ventilated the concrete and tile home, but we needed to screen out the mosquitoes, spiders, and any other wildlife that might want to come inside.
The most vivid memory I have of our first year in that house is of my dad, sitting in his new office
downstairs, already cluttered with loose paper, bookshelves with Tolkien’s entire and illustrated works, pressing and stapling fresh-cut screen into custom-built metal or wooden windowframes for every window in the house, which had stained glass panes that slid horizontally open and shut.
We kept out most critters, welcomed the geckos, who were harmless, lived behind the hung paintings and pictures, and ate any bugs that did get inside, and tolerated the family of fruit bats that lived in the rafters between the ceiling, the crossbeam in the living room, and the roof.
Figure 12: The Back Yard
For $900 a month, we rented what my father jokes was my mother’s dream house: a white-painted Southern Mansion.
And he’s sort of right: The house has big white (brick) columns, a two-story stucco façade, and a landscaped brick sidewalk.
But it was also more like the Southern mansion of the 1920s than the 2020s, because when we moved in there was no air conditioning, no hot water, and an outdoor residence that could have been used by a live-in housekeeper, though we just used it for storage.
Always-open were the windows and doors, and the lush front and back gardens ventilated the house.
We had a gas stove and oven, Dad installed our own ceiling fans, and only, eventually, long after we moved in, did we purchase a
single-room in-wall AC unit for the kitchen.
CURB #2
2.
Colonia Becklin itself had two defining features.
The first is “The Middle,” a woods enclosed by the cobblestone quarter the road made.
The Middle had trees and trees: eucalyptus on the south side, ceiba and Guanacaste in the south and west, mango on the north.
Because most of the Beckliners were either homeschooled or went to NCA, we often worked on projects together, hosted one another, and had parties.
I learned a lot from the Beckliners, as we called ourselves, not just about strategy, but about how to have friends and be one—how to take ridicule and to dish it back out in equal measure over an intense card game or tea, while
coconut-oil brownies baked in the oven.
Figure 13: Ekphrastic to the Art of Gardening
If
a
porch
wouldn’t
welcome a
hummingbird it
likely would not
welcome me, either.
If a porch will not soothe
my sunburns, nor perfume
any evening with blossom —
yet, I too must learn the
care my father bestows
orchids and aloe, not
begrudge them for the
hours they spend
feeling his hands
hug dirt around
them & water their
roots in
the hot
early
spring
dry
spell.
Inside the Middle were desire paths that criss-crossed from house to house.
One reached between my house and the Vanderweeses, a family of seven whose younger daughter Kaki was in my class.
Another reached between the Oscar’s house on the east edge and the southwest-edge Chens and Henzlers, who all played cards with Kaki’s older sister Lisa.
When I was in middle school, I became part of this card-playing group, and the bunch of us would walk to each other’s houses to play Euchre, Up and Down the River, Catan, Spades, and Pictionary.
When I hosted, it was most often for a movie or marathon of a franchise film like Batman, Narnia, or Lord of the Rings, most of which we had on DVD.
If we couldn’t agree on a movie we had, a few of us might walk down to a rental store down the block, which we suspected pirated the movies; either they burned the discs, or they literally recorded the movie in-theater.
Becklin’s second major feature is that by the outside, you would have no idea that each of these houses shared the same basic blueprint.
Every house had a huge living room on the left side and a right side two-story setup with a 3-bed, 3-bath upstairs and a kitchen, office, and 2-bed,
2-bath downstairs.
While the center hallways were in the same spot above one another in the center of these houses, none of them were constructed truly identically—none of them were the same color, none had just the same windows, porches, staircases, or kitchen arrangements.
Some kitchens had islands, others peninsulas, others a single built-in cabinet.
Some had full front porches and tiny back porches; others were the opposite.
Some had more doors to the outside than others.
Figure 14: Ekphrastic to the Art of Cooking
1
of
five
filled pages
in my recipe
book is directions
for potato soup. There
are ingredients that
are not listed —
fifty minutes in front
of the stove as
the broth boils,
etc. Three pages
are bread recipes,
for Xmas, for comfort,
& for over-ripe bananas.
The other recipes
are in a text chain
1100 miles long.
What do you
add to burger
patties to
make
them
taste
like
home
?
And though each Becklin house on the circle shared the same amount of concrete blocks and rebar as the next—each was barred on the windows and doors; each was constructed with concrete and rebar so as to be earthquake proof—each was completely visually unique on the outside.
The Dunsworths’ house was styled like Renaissance Revival, with false crossbars painted onto shaped concrete.
The Sharpes had a single turret bathroom on the second floor, and our house had columns in front, but the Henzlers and Brachts, whose front yards were chain-link fenced in, had no columns at all.
There seemed to be no reason that each of these facades was
developed differently—but it felt like a reverse of the classic American suburbian image.
Instead of identical homes with different families inside, these houses were completely unique, but each contained a white, North American missionary family with school-age children.
You knew a house by its features only if you didn’t know who lived there at the time: One was the Mosts’, then belonged to the Hennings, who were replaced by the Woughters.
The house with two turrets like a castle became the Izzos’, then the McWhorters’.
And if you knew them well enough, you carpooled with them to the school many of us attended.
CURBS #3, #4
When they
dogsit, there are always two keys. There is the key to the
gate and the key to the door. Forget one, and the way is shut. Except the gate on
house nine has a hinge, an elbow that swings in and releases the bolt from its sheath
without unlocking a thing. He climbs the chainlink fence between house eight and nine
to feed the chocolate lab, who has already eaten dozens of mangoes and avocados
(including the pits), two cups of dog food
from the canister in the laundry
room. The labrador is a hundred
pounds and dirty. House eight
can hear seven when anyone
there yells, arguing,
and nine can smell
eight smoking
cigars out
back.
When they
carpool, the gate is usually unlocked, but
sometimes it’s not. Nine doesn’t have a fenced front yard; the kids sit on the curb
waiting for house seventeen, then after a few years eight, then after a couple years
thirty-two. Only on very special days are any teenagers allowed to drive. They take the cow
road, a single-lane dirt, paved and potholed, cobblestone and gravelled path through the
between-highway-and-ravine. The trucks
play music. The keys jingle.
Nine and eleven always bring
more to school than they
need: not only books, but
tools and handmade
accessories. Made
with boythings:
a grey-green
paracord bracelet, for the off-chance a cliff will
appear and need to be rappelled down, but only if it’s less than fifteen feet
high. In their other pockets, rocks found on walks; behind their ears, flowers. One
teen takes his shoes off as soon as the last bell rings, runs to buy chips. They wear slip-on
shoes, clothes too big, clothes they will have for six years and longer. The other teen
conceals their Tumblr account, their
cell phone background, colors
framed as pure coincidence.
Gate-keeping has become
a metaphor, but the fear
behind it isn’t. They
hide even a film
of speculative
fiction, of
dream.
Half of the Becklin homes were connected through the missionary community and NCA, and the others were occupied by either families who had lived there for a generation, or by middle class Nicaraguans on the upward trend.
All the ‘other’ houses were guarded by rumor—an instrument maker lived on the corner across from the water tower; even the Becklin
Mansion itself was like the Wonka Factory: nobody ever goes in; nobody ever comes out.
One time, the youngest Woughter, Lindsey, and I picked up the mantle for door-to-door sales and tried to see for ourselves.
The Woughters made brownies more than any family I knew, and mine made limeade with fruit from a tree in our backyard, so we combined forces and went around the circle selling them.
As co-owners of a one-day-only limeade-and-brownies business, Lindsey and I were for once let into Becklin houses that had only been a façade, a mystery, to us for years before.
Next to the Vanderweeses, a German man lived with his Nicaraguan wife.
He worked either for the German embassy or the German school—the flags on his car indicated such.
We knew nothing about them until stepping inside, and realized then that they were a family of artists—a rainforest mural spanned the entire walls of the stairwell on the way up to his office.
The house next to theirs was fenced in, the only name we had “Oso,” “Bear,” the Doberman at the gate.
That’s how we identified any other houses gated and covered in front by foliage: their dogs.
The pinscher and the chihuahua in the house that connected to a gated orchard guarded by a dalmatian, or the two shih-tzus on the Vanderweeses’ other side.
Sometimes we met in the Middle for a bonfire.
At the end of the semester, we would compile our paper notes to burn on the one cobblestone road that led to nothing—straight down from the road into the heart of the Middle.
Next to it, for the longest time, was a strong, tall pile of building sand, the kind you mix into cement.
We knew starting a fire there would be easy to put out with the sand and wouldn’t spread on the ground because of the stone.
The other pyrotechnics would happen at the no-net tennis court at the east edge of Colonia Becklin, right up against the edge of South Highway.
The tennis court was maybe ten feet up above the road, and there was a wall separating us, but it didn’t stop us from losing frisbees over it into the road or from peering over.
Other fires were less controlled.
One squirrel crossed power wires and fried on the spot, a flat gray board of supercooked rodent that fell onto the ground in front of the Izzos’ house.
In the Izzos’ back yard, Nat and I would use the Axe body spray to create a small flame-thrower with which we lit kindling for fun.
We met on the tennis courts to light fireworks, unsupervised.
In Nicaragua, there are few regulations around the size or type of fireworks that may be sold, so between Christmas and New Years small El Dragon fireworks kiosks opened along every major road to sell pyrotechnics.
On the tennis courts, we’d bend the metal ends of long sparklers so that we could spin them around—the earliest video I still have in my camera roll, taken with the front camera of an iPod touch.
The worst fire none of us started: a tree fire inside the trunk of a Guanacaste right on the side of the road.
If we had let it burn unchecked, a huge limb hundreds of feet high would have fallen on our neighbors house.
It was one of the few times I saw the whole of Colonia Becklin out at once, united—carrying water from various houses in buckets and tubs, borrowing ladders, to put out the blaze, braving even the bees’ nests in the same tree that it disturbed.
As we grew up, we played in The Middle less and less, and when I was in high school, the Becklins leased its land to coffee growers, who began at the outermost edge of the middle and began to plant the entire perimeter with young coffee plants.
Little by little the concentric coffee circles reached into the Middle—our entry points closed, the paths and trails grew over.
It was easier to walk the circle than cut through the Middle.
But sitting on the curb, waiting for carpool, over the course of the year the plants eventually flowered, then turned into the berries that grow right on the branch, then turned red.
And then, coming home from school, they’d all be picked.
3.
I’m trying to avoid writing about Becklin as a kind of symbol, a safe-haven, a sanctuary.
For two reasons.
On one hand, that would be reductive—for all of Becklin’s positive qualities, hurt still got in.
Many missionaries who lived in Becklin ended up not being able to afford or emotionally handle living in Nicaragua, and the turnover in the neighborhood reflected the stress of the mission.
There were always more failed Crusades than successful ones for lack of funds and morale.
Having every window open for air meant that every window was also open for sound.
For much of my time there, the Keelings, another family, had left their cats behind, unfixed, who multiplied and lived in the sewer grates outside.
At night, they’d fight and mate and scream, which I’d hear from my room.
With the windows open, you could hear the South Highway, the semitrucks using their air brakes coming down the hill.
One day, a horrible van accident collided with the ledge.
Everyone in the neighborhood heard the collision, and those closest to it felt the ground shake.
We looked over the tennis court wall, and gasped.
Blood streamed down the back of the broken glass of the white van, and an ambulance carted some people in very bad condition away.
We’d talk about the accidents at school when they happened—one time, a semitruck carrying dry cement flipped up near where Jacob lived.
Jake, who passed it on the way to NCA, remembered people not stopping to help the injured driver, but bringing bags to clean up the dry cement for themselves instead.
I can see you cringing at the name—“Colony”? as in colonialism? One way to answer this is that “colony” was meant to mean more like an ant colony, a sequence of living units joined by a corridor, but the longer answer is yes, exactly as in colonialism.
Nicaragua’s almost always had an income inequality problem—it’s second to Haiti in citizen income—and large
swaths of land and sectors of business are owned by the same families.
A single family underwrites the national rum company, the Toyota dealership, the burn ward at the private hospital, the business university, and the Barceló Hotel franchise in Managua.
That family is sort of related to another major Nicaraguan family, with original roots in Spain, that begat multiple presidents, several businesses, and an opposition newspaper (and thereby some recent political prisoners).
A third major family, of dictatorship fame, was overthrown and killed in the 1970s.
The Becklins aren’t any of these families, but they were wealthy enough, at some point, to build a whole neighborhood and name it after themselves.
But onto Colonia Becklin’s colonialist historical roots was grafted another slice of Nicaraguan history: the Sandinista Revolution.
After the civil war ended, the Christian! Socialist! Solidary! government enacted laws redistributing what seemed like about half of landowner property to the lower and middle classes.
This is how, I was told, many Nicaraguans who were not the Becklins came to own many of the properties in Colonia Becklin, but this might not be true at all.
What my research suggests is that the Sandinista government of the 1980s only redistributed farmland (and boy did they), so my understanding of Colonia Becklin might be entirely misguided.
“Colony,” like “Quinta,” is a placemarker—like “Barrio,” like “Villas,” like “Urbanization.” They’re the “.pdf” or “.docx” of the name of a neighborhood.
So we lived in Becklin.colonia, and my classmate Karly that just got married lived in Malú.quinta, and after becoming empty nesters my parents moved to Vistas_de_Momotombo.urbanización.
We don’t do this a whole lot in English for neighborhoods, but we do it for other edifices: University Mall, Florida Southern College.
It’s the other way around for lakes though—in English, we call things Lake Mirror or Black Warrior River but in Nicaragua, the two huge lakes that sandwich the capital city are just Xolotlán and Cocibolca.
But onto Colonia Becklin’s colonial historical roots have been grafted slice after slice of Nicaraguan economic history—downturn after downturn.
The Sandinista government of the 1980s stabilized annual inflation rates of 14,000% by implementing a new currency, but their progress was wiped out by Hurricane Joan, which poured itself out onto the middle of the country.
Later, other economic downturns, both local and global, on top of rigorous squatter’s rights protections in the country, forced the sale or relinquishment of several properties by the Becklin family to other Nicaraguans.
My family rented from one of these non-Becklin people.
CURB #5
The political unrest in 2018 had been the sign many missionaries were looking for to pack up and go.
My parents and I still find this odd—in fact, we mourn—that a political movement that did not threaten Americans (unless they crossed the picket line) would persuade so many ‘lifers’ to leave for good with their families.
One of the biggest failures of the missionary community during the political unrest in 2018 was that missions agencies recalled their plants back to the US, and independent missionaries lost the funding to stay.
There was an exodus not just of expatriate Americans advised by the US embassy to leave the capital city, but of missionaries who worried that their children’s educations and their day-to-day work, which
were subsequently heavily audited by the Nicaraguan government to verify that they weren’t secretly CIA political actors, were too disrupted to continue.
Many of the Becklin memories are bittersweet after all that’s happened—my mom said she can’t bear to put on another yard sale for a friend, selling all their belongings for them after they leave like she did in 2018.
Estate sale after estate sale for the death of a family’s commitment to doing the work of continuing to live in Nicaragua.
The deaths of ministries—feeding programs that were never passed off to a local team, orphanages and women’s shelters that never became self-sustaining.
Schools that still struggle to get teachers, much less accredited.
It betrays the flaw in many missionary ethics—that home is apart from the people you serve.
The generations that followed, some of them, have learned the lesson, committed to being better, to being and becoming a part of the communities they serve by living in and with and among them.
My parents made this shift late, but they have made it, and it’s brought them friendships they maybe secretly thought they’d never make back when all those missionaries left.
Leaving the country is even easier than getting in, for Americans.
Always have to add that caveat.
For Americans.
When we would enter one side of the American Embassy to renew our passports from in-country or deal with a paperwork issue, we walked past much longer lines of Nicaraguans applying for an exit visa to the United States.
ROAD #7
To get to any beach other than the main resort beaches (sometimes, even those), it takes a car that can handle the gradual downgrade from reinforced concrete to smooth asphalt, to tightly-laid cobblestone, to packed dirt.
In theory, any car could take that drive—it was gravel half of the way from the gate of the Center to the dining hall at the top of the hill.
But if you went too slow, the terrain vibrated the whole car, and you could be caught in a dust cloud even the car’s AC filter couldn’t screen out.
It helped if you were higher off the ground, or had an all-wheel drive.

When the protests began, the roads were full of demonstrators.
They lined themselves for KMs.
Seas of blue and white, the national colors, cross-country.
Old and young united, in 2018, against higher taxes with fewer benefits.
United as mothers against their missing children’s disappearers.
When the paramilitary began to respond, they mostly drove the same truck: a Toyota Hilux.
They were the informal troop carrier, the official car of the unofficial political police.
They patrolled neighborhoods, with or without armed men in the high-clearance beds of grey and silver trucks.

There were missionaries who drove Hiluxes.
My dad said it damaged their Witness, their ability to establish or maintain relationships with everyday people.
The Hilux had become a symbol of terror, where it had once only been a representation of some sort of financial privilege—maybe a strong business, considerable support, good work—now it connoted connection to a government determined to stamp and quell and silence.
When the day of the national strike occurred, the streets, usually full of vendors, oxcarts, mototaxis, pedestrians, and vehicles, were blank, empty.
The Sandinista party now governs Nicaragua in what used to be a 3-party system, but now effectively is a one-party state.
That “effectually” is the reason for the following travel advisory issued by the US Embassy in Nicaragua:
Country Summary: The government of Nicaragua arbitrarily enforces laws for political purposes.
Throughout Nicaragua, government officials and law enforcement continue to target those opposed to the rule of President Ortega.
The government and its affiliated groups have been reported to:….
Arbitrarily seize and/or search private property including personal phones and computers for anti-government content.
Arbitrarily charged individuals with terrorism money laundering, and organized crime offenses for political reasons.
Emma remembers best what happened when ABWE tried to recall Mom and Dad to the United States when the unrest started.
Of every house in Becklin, ours was one of the only ones without a tile or concrete upstairs floor.
Instead, our upstairs floor was a single layer of varnished hardwood, which she pressed her ear to in my parents’ room to listen to my dad, furious, raising his voice for one of the first times in our memory, refusing to go.
Why would they leave when the hammer was about to drop on all of the people my parents had built relationships with?
for Nicole
The school year’s begun.
You’ve changed your @; at the call center,
Texan women want managers.
Cinderblock tranques torn down, murals name Desaparecidos.
“Ortega, Somoza” —not aloud— still “son la misma cosa.”
You’re able to leave, deep guilt takes root.
Since I graduated from high school, I’ve been back to Becklin only a few times.
When my sister was still in high school, I visited my family a couple of times.
But after she graduated, my parents moved to Vistas De Momotombo, north of Managua next to the ABWE Center, and there was hardly any excuse to go back—many friends had aged out, the Chens combined their home and restaurant business in a house on South Highway.
Becklin’s families have turned over so much that part of why my parents moved out, beyond being closer to work and not needing to be near the missionary school anymore, was because they couldn’t bear to live in a neighborhood all their neighbors had deserted.
If there are still missionary families in Becklin, I imagine they keep to themselves, or are much newer to the country.
The only Becklin remaining of my generation there is the Facebook
Becklin—the small groups, the private pages, the messenger boards and text threads in flip phones.
Grainy iPad 2 and iPhone 4 photo rolls remind us of nights fooling around with Wii’s JustDance 2, arguing over a game of chess, and taking snacks from one house to another.
Yard sales that circulated some of the same household items between families.
When I have been back since, the Middle is overgrown.
Two major, huge trees, the Guanacaste and the ceiba, have both fallen, taking tons of foliage with them and changing the landscape of light as it hits the ground, the middle, the road.
My mom’s best friends, Bethany, Beth, Susan, and Anne, her colleagues Diane and Cari, had all moved out, and the concentric circles of coffee plants choked the Middle’s playspace, now 7 rows deep.
The trails, the lawnmowed clearing-slash-soccer field, the tire swings, the old bonfire spots, had all been covered by brush, vines, weeds, and garden clippings and cuttings from every house in the neighborhood.
Figure 16: Heimweh
have you lost track of yourself again? it’s okay.
it wasn’t really that you misplaced the time; you were just here,
leaning up against that counter in the kitchen back home, eating mac and cheese
straight from the pot like you used to.
you can still see it; can’t you? the speckled floors
you would lay down on after being outside, the broom next to the fridge
that you’d use to clean up
the ceramic shards of a broken dish carefully, because you were barefoot
and can’t you smell it? the hot, soapy steam of clean dishes,
and the oily breath of pizza.
or the psst a coke makes before you pour Fresca
and Fanta Uva into the same cup and drink it, grinning
do you remember what the microwave timer sounds like? how you and your best friend pulled so hard to separate the Tupperware lid from the glass dish?
and the crash of the silverware when you hit your hip on it—
There you are
using the words you saved for the occasion— was it the right hip, or the left?
how good it is to know, after all this time, that you remember
and have brought yourself here with you.

The Inhospitable Squirrel
There once was a very large, black and white Squirrel.
Squirrel was looking for somewhere to live, but all the other trees in the colonia were already inhabited by the Oropendulas, the Chocoyos, and the Opossums — not that Squirrel couldn’t find have shared, but that he wanted a place that was “only his.” He even ruled out trees the leaf-cutter ants’ paths sometimes crossed.
•
It came to pass that one day Squirrel noticed the large stone trunks that circled the wood.
Long, thin, black branches connected the trunks, and the longer Squirrel thought about it, the more he became convinced they would make a the perfect residence.
So he moved in.
Because the branches circled the wood, he could reach easily the northern mango, the southern eucalyptus, and the eastern monkey-paw from where he slept above the western banana.
•
Soon after, Squirrel saw a guardabarranco resting on the northern lip of the branches.
“Shoo!” he said, “Go alight on someone else’s tree.”
He then saw, on the branch below him, a leaf-cutter scout leading a new train of workers.
Furious, he thought he should hang down to that wire and stop them.
But that’s when he closed the circuit — ZAP — and, stiff as a board, he fell to the cobble below.
A Complex / & Simple / [B]order
Let’s not pretend —
our bodies are temples — rather they are
tents of meeting —
The offerings — beloved, to be loved — found out by bears — lions, and eaten
Thoroughway
The avenue is named Florida, named for flowers, of which there are few along the road except for the florist across the street.
Even with its 6-wheel pickup trucks, motorcycles, and sports cars, the road is quiet.
No semitrucks pass by using air brakes.
Cars don’t avoid pedestrians who have crossed the northbound lanes and are waiting on the double yellow line to cross the southbound ones.
The electricity isn’t out in the corner store.
You can’t hear the bass line of a karaoke bar a half-mile north.
No cows are driven along the roadside; no people sort through trash set out for whenever the garbage trucks might come two weeks from now.
The garbage trucks will come tomorrow.
The recycling truck will come the day after.
No grocery bags jump the road in a gust like squirrels jumping tree limbs.
The road is clean.
There is no glass or crime scene spray paint left over from an accident where blood trickled down the back of a minivan that hit a wall by the roadside, whose impact you might have felt in the ground beneath you.
Porch Time
Like smoke in the room today the clouds
are strung low the gliding osprey swinging lower the kitchen fly
You say the air is hot enough to cook with but this is not true you have been cold taken out of the fridge you feel the touch of it
condensing on your skin and it is saying come
live and grow in the same world as the rest of us
the clouds promised me you will not spoil.

‘Rain / Hurling itself at the roof”
-Tracy K. Smith, “The Angels”, Wade in the Water
Skylight
How I long that the skin of our chambers were a little bit thinner!
I long for the layers of paint, zinc, and 1x2s that lead to the air above and below,
the beam at the crux of that housed only bats and their refuse.
I search for our upstairs floor that a single layer of wood, that through it I might hear God,
or the scratch of my sister’s dog’s toenails,
that through it I might glimpse just the beams of his heaven’s ceiling.
When I listen, I yearn for the cry of the cicadas, the caterwaul, the whoosh of January that knocks
the avocados to the ground and the cirrus above alike;
I listen for the rain that drowns out anything except my heartbeat.
Prayer (I)
Each encounter my body reels — to find itself— again-- there are
four persons there— God and a god— can’t shy away—
or hyphenate—
the O removed marks the wonder— or the “Hey, you” — often “Look, me.”
When will days be when flesh quiets— lets spirit lead? when mirror fogs—
body to eyes? race—speak first— wake up to them— on waking, sleep
through call, I turn— off the alarm — that’d wake me up— to true wanting.
Sickstina
There is a Nicaraguan legend saying
Death drives an oxcart with 2 skeleton oxen.
I drive a golf cart with an electric motor / 6 batteries. I am in Florida / this is par for the course
Last time I swung a golf club, death’s cart passed by us
By the grace of a few stitches and God / in my father’s forehead.
We point thermometers at campers’ foreheads Before we comb their hair for lice, to which we’d say
You, bug, are not welcome; begone / mosquitos are enough for us. Horseflies, stay across the lake with the oxen
Whose owners would see the camp turned back to golf course, The canal between properties rose / result of the battering
By hurricanes yearly. Golf cart’s batteries, Sandy after counselor couldn’t stop forehead-
First entry into lake, still worked. Brakes weakened even more, of course. The mosquito-borne disease was fun to say,
Its non-discriminatory spread hit oxen-
drivers and missionaries alike / Chikungunya, “goo,” virus
We talk about which strain we’d want to hit us:
Years-old-injury-inflaming kind stopped motor
functions / coaches move slower than Cow Road morning-carpool oxen OR peeling fingernails / sores in throat and head
Liquid-diet makes sister size down, she can’t say
words because of pain / both relapse / neither strain ever runs its course.
The two seasons / dry and wet / stay their long course a longer cycle rules new bugs / come with the must
some are crunchy underfoot / some, rain wipes bodies away by doors / wings have stayed below lights charged by raucous generator
brown beetles hum between death and light at forehead level, for my family twenty cents a body’s an income option
Mango, avocado / fifteen cents a still edible fruit / another income option being stung as I collect and count them makes me inside-curse
Passing through the orange groves at age five I was stung / same bees on eyes, forehead Healthy people binge on reality television series about doctors removing pus
Moths become not lit-foyer doorway nuisances but inputs into meme generators
Crickets get reduced / nightly harmonies to white noise recordings keeping next-door party noise at bay
Oxen’s tails have built-in fly-swatters, they must
so our main course can be cooked to three-fourths over wood fire Flies will circle every body, living or dead, come March and May.
Prayer (II)
As the flying kite leads my childhood body to run among the dry grasses
My body dangles on the ground by the tether of my soul.
The eastward breath of wind directs The triangle of scaled red, orange,
and yellow, flounder-eyed, up until The airstream stops, a dip and a flip and
the spirit meets the body Two, celestial [and] body[s] circle,
connected by a thin, stretched neck, They collide, with spray
Not a sloppy wet kiss but a slimy, wet fist Does heaven meet earth[?]
Psalm (I)
We ought not commit undue violence to our food.
Martyred tomatoes aside, the fondue my family eats at Christmas
has been given AN INSCRIPTION ABOVE, A CHARGE,
“THIS IS THE MELTING POT, KING OF IDEALS.”
AT THIS TIME TWO metaphors WERE CRUCIFIED WITH HIM,
ONE (a fruit salad) ON THE RIGHT AND ONE (a mosaic) ON THE LEFT.
You ought NOT COMMIT FALSE WITNESS AGAINST YOUR NEIGHBOR.
The Monterey Jack does not refuse entry to the paprika,
The olive oil does not despise the butter.
Likewise, the fondue does not say to the bread, “You shall not enter,”
The cheese doesn’t say to the green apple “Begone, I NEVER KNEW YOU.”
The fondue my family eats at Christmas gets cold and hard
when it is left to itself in the bowl untouched.
Young Place to Camp Gilead Drive
Left to speed humps Right to right turn
Back up / drive past shitzhu second-glance-attached to man
Left at school light Turn on parkway
No wrong turn to enter / trick me into fleeing westward
Slow through toll booths Slight at long turns
Streetlights end / solstice night swallows me like a great fish
(Left from Tarshish Boat to Joppa
Jonah was eaten by a humpback unicorn shark)
P[r]ay to exit Ramp to I-4
Speed limit rises five as night pukes me into light
Again I bend Off of the road
Toward Love’s gas station / left past where wreck was last weekend
Flashing red meets Flashing yellow
Wind / speed past Helene / enter / asphalt smells freshly lain
A roundabout way of saying se busca asesino
Sty God
Dirt
& oil
From Dust You are and to Dust You will return
caught in s[k]in
unreachable by human
fingertips, nails pressing into pores chewed
& manicured
work in conjunction to tease
white liquid & red
out of an unwilling gape It splashes on the mirror
blood in the center of visage is it enough
do the fingertips return to the spot
glistening & swollen
they do & squeeze
from other angles more blood is required
Without the Shedding of Blood there is no Remission of Sins
if you had only let the spot exist it would have emerged itself
First rain of the season
Many-times-hand-washed white polo with the green trapezoid embroidered on the
left breast
Hidden beneath a red striped sweat- er / except for the collar, buttons, out-
lined chest
in ninety-five, feels like hundred- three weather / bulletin board calendar bets
rains best
chances of cooling earth to eight-
y nine / when it does, sidewalk rain lilies start from rest
and race to be first to drink the
spat droplets, though it runs brown off red striped roof closest
thing to salvation when white polo wants collision with another, rain washing
to est-
uaries beneath the lilies.
Spider
I saw myself a Damocles Two meters above bed Meet chukka boot
And then fall onto sole
Soul still hanging by own thread
Five generations later Can’t cite benevolence And this spider
Their name will not be wrote In Papa’s family Bible.
Earthquake
concrete promise : stable
concrete skeleton : rebar
doorknob turn : avian evacuation school alarm : you have just experienced afterthought aftershocks : the past concrete cracks : we did our best
plate promise : subduction fault line : god
Y’know those things that happen?
The things that you wake up differently after.
They never really happened in a day, though now we remember them as such -- of course we watched the news about them for weeks after they happened.
The kind of thing that people make promises, like, “This will never happen again,” though, deep down, we know they will, just not in the same way
You know what I’m talking about.
We call them milestones, I think, but they’re not, not in the way we experience them-- I’ve never seen a mile marker by the road or on a trail and been changed by it.
I think a better word is tire-nail, the kind of thing that forces you to replace something, to check in your car for repairs.
My dad-- and my mom, both-- watched the Challenger explode.
And, you know, I never hear them talk about the Berlin Wall falling or the Iran-Contra affair, or even the Gulf War like they talk about the Challenger.
I guess I ought to clarify that my parents are Floridians; they didn’t watch the Challenger lift off in a cloud of more smoke than usual and then explode on CNN : they watched it watched it.
My mom and dad were both 16 at the time, and they both became teachers, though I don’t know if it had anything to do with the teacher, Sharon McCauliffe, who went up in that mission.
They -- whoever “they” are -- that there’s a clear line between Generation Z and the Millennials: those who remember 9/11 and those who don’t.
I think I can buy this, and it puts me squarely in Gen Z.
It goes to show the difference between knowing and remembering: I know where I was on 9/11, but I don’t remember.
For a little while, people talked about the 2016 election as a generational dividing marker, but as 2020 unfolds, I am more and more certain that this year is it.
There’s no way it can’t be.
So I’m thinking a lot about what it looks like to be a baby -- or, really, even a toddler -- right now.
I know it’s likely not much different than what it’s ever looked like to be a baby at any other point in history, really -- you’re making the same sounds most babies make, doing the things most babies do
Do babies go out less because of the coronavirus?
Are babies more or less affected by wildfires now more than they were at other times when there were wildfires?
Are babies seeing their parents more than usual?
Babies, if you’re reading this, what do you think? or, really, you should probably call your parents and ask them what they think.
Kids who were babies during the coronavirus, I’m not going to lecture you on how easy we had it before : on how, before the pandemic, every hug wasn’t a prisoner’s dilemma, and we didn’t negotiate whether our friends would think badly of us for going out to eat (unless we were on diets, or trying to be more frugal, or going with people our friends hate, or eating somewhere they despised).
I’m not going to make you feel bad for not really having a concept of who was (and wasn’t) president during this time, for asking “was it really that good?” or “was it really that bad?” when we talk about things that happened.
Tell me, what songs have survived?
In January, you heard the winds blow hard against the windows and doors, rattling them.
It was the perfect time to be outside, eyes closed on the warm black mesh of the trampoline, toes away from the hot metal ring and springs holding it open, because the moment you got warm the wind would whip it away.
Even in winter, the sun bears down, and the days shorten only by a minute.
Keeping your eyes shut, the only thing you see is the red-green imprint on the back of your eyelid, your arms pressed hard over your face, eyes and nose pressed into the elbow pits to keep the sun off.
From there you hear everything, the mango tree swishing at your feet and the avocado swishing above your head, and the heavy thuds of fruit hitting the hard dirt and
scraggly St.
Augustine grass.
A buzz zips past your ear-- a fruit fly, or a wasp, on its way from one grounded fruit to another.
They eat as little of the mango skin as they need to begin chomping at the flesh inside, the sticky mass that strings out when you pull it but cuts clean into spears or chunks if you get it right, around the oblong pit, a tan teardrop.
The wasps love, but many of your friends are allergic to the mango.
Much of what grows in the tropics causes a rash in the right dose.
Pineapple, for example, which eaten enough will rash raw your tongue & throat.
Your neighbor, one of the ones you have a crush on (they couldn’t hang out today), eats enough Warheads to do this as well -- you picture their tongue held out, oozing blood in speckle.
The image is interrupted by the crash of a big green avocado on the zinc rooftop of your bodega, the annex to the house that keeps a dusty bathroom with all the storage tubs stacked in it, a back porch with the washer-dryer and the gas canister it runs on, and a walk-in closet where
the big freezer is.
The doors scrape open in the dim light, and there’s always a scuttle of the startled iguana that lives between the drywall ceiling tiles and the rooftop.
It’s a perfect oven for a cold-blooded tenant, which you prefer to any mammals that might take it up if it weren’t for the green-and-black striped, scaly dragon that watches you hang linens and thin cottons on the clotheswire.
The bodega would be a maid’s quarters, if things still worked that way.
You feel a bump at your butt -- it’s the dog, nosing your form sunk into the trampoline.
From beneath you look like a body pressing into water before the surface tension breaks.
He sniffs around, takes a whizz on one of the legs of the trampoline.
The grass is long down there; the tradeoff of less direct sunlight is protection from the mower.
Two kinds of grass grow in the yard: the tall broadswords of stemmy St.
Augustine, and the prickly lawngrass that cut through the shorts we wore to school like a fork through tissue paper.
Every second Thursday, the Downtown Lakeland Partnership hosts a food truck rally, and I sprint to the Nicaraguan food truck, Fritango, with my college-provided voucher.
Compared to eating a queso frito from Fritango, buying from other food trucks at the rally is like trying to use toenail clippers on your hands— unsatisfying and impractical.
I order carne asada with chimichurri and tostones con queso and gallo pinto.
I wouldn’t choose lobster kebabs because they are not brochetas and I wouldn’t eat a grilled cheese and soup because it is not a nacatamal.
There is no true choice to be made.
Nicaragua and Costa Rica are engaged in a silent culture war.
Intergovernmental border treaties say that the Rio San Juan marks the boundary between Nicaragua and Costa Rica, but when the Nicaraguan Sandinista government tested that agreement by diverting the river farther south, things got messy.
As you stand in line at the airport, video montages of the river play with logos advertising the scene as a Nicaraguan attraction, with pangas—10-foot boats with Yamaha engines and fiberglass hulls—skimming its surface.
But even though the official international dispute concerns the Rio San Juan, the people’s battle pertains to gallo pinto, which is when you serve rice and beans served mixed together.
If you go to the mercados (not the real ones, but the ones that we take the tourists to), artisans sell small masks and purses and hammocks, paintings hung next to tank tops saying, “Gallo pinto es 100% Nica”— “one hundred percent Nicaraguan.”
When I think of food that belongs to the U.S.
South, where I was born before I moved to Nicaragua at age 8, indisputable staples appear to me: Persian lime pie, cornbread pudding—deep-fried okra.
In my experience so far, no northerner has dared to cross the culinary line to claim that those foods could be anything but pertaining to the same culture as bungalow homes and peaches.
In Nicaragua, things are different—any pinolero (a folk name for Nicaraguans) will tell you that Costa Rican gallo pinto, made with black beans instead of the superior Nicaraguan frijoles rojos, is frowned upon.
Nicaraguan gallo pinto sticks to itself, but it is not sticky.
The beans and rice remain distinct in flavor but so complementary that to separate them is to insist that you neither know nor care about its identity as a dish.
Costa Rican rice and beans are loose and oily, and sometimes so many other vegetables get thrown in with the main two ingredients that the name gallo pinto shouldn’t even apply.
Costa Rican rice and beans is for picky eaters.
My mother found out when we first moved to Latin America that the dust that drafted into our house each day was too much for her to handle.
She was already juggling laundry and the task of coordinating service trips between American groups who support our family’s work and the communities they would bring medicine and food packages to.
After consulting with other missionary wives in Managua, she hired Azucena Monroy, an English and computer science student at the Instituto Diocesano in town to sweep the porch, mop the floor, dust the bookshelves, and bathe our dog.
Azucena, whose name my grandmother believes is pronounced “antsy zenith” but is translated “Lily,” is the same height as my mom, less than five feet, but average height for a Nicaraguan woman.
She is thin and has dark brown hair; she is quiet.
She cleans quietly, with her headphones in her ears, but she doesn’t listen to music while she washes dishes.
She uses lemon-scented Pledge furniture spray.
She loves Pippin, my dog, and he loves her back.
He is bilingual because of her.
When I was in third grade, my family was robbed by someone who broke the padlocks on our driveway gate, back gate, and back door.
Several other families were robbed, so the community decided to pool money and hire a guard service.
Cooking lunch and dinner one day a week for the men who patrolled the neighborhood was added to Azucena’s tasklist.
This was when Nicaraguan food became part of my home life—my parents didn’t cook it.
I didn’t realize the crucial difference between red-bean gallo pinto and black-bean Costa Rican gallo pinto until I was in high school.
That was mainly due to the fact that I never ate Nicaraguan food at home—or at school—until I started the eleventh grade.
My parents served the same dinners when our house faced coffee crops that we had eaten when we lived in front of an orange grove in Florida: a starch, a vegetable, and a meat, with bread on the side.
I took leftovers to school every day and ate out of Tupperware containers.
Meanwhile, my younger sister and my friends—whether they were Nicaraguan or had moved to Nicaragua from Canada, Korea, Honduras, or the U.S.—consumed tajadas with queso blanco and pollo frito served on red plastic trays in the Cafetín.
I frequently lost the Tupperware, so often that by the time I was in the fifth grade my mom, instead of driving to the grocery store to buy me a new lunchbox, drove to the fabric store to sew our family a plastic-bag-holder.
I lost more than lunch boxes—my Legos went missing; I misplaced CDs.
In my child’s mind, I blamed Azucena.
“Why isn’t she suspect?” I thought.
“She is, after all, not rich” –and there was no one else who was day-by-day near to my belongings more often than I was than Azucena.
My mom defended her.
She said that I was the one who lost them, that I would find them if I kept looking.
I didn’t believe her, but she was right each time.
Each time my family returns to the United States, like at Christmas last year or when my aunt was dying, Azucena stayed at our house because it wasn’t safe to leave it empty for more than a couple days.
She spent the time repairing computers.
All these years, too, she took care of her mother, her sister, and her sister’s children.
Aguinaldo is the mandatory tradition of the “Christmas Bonus” in Nicaragua.
It consists of a washtub full of the basic cooking and cleaning materials that the family of any employee needs: rice and frijoles rojos, cooking oil, Marfil-brand soap, sugar, detergent, sponges, and bleach.
The neighborhood, at least according to the local Facebook page, has gotten rougher in the last 6 years, so my parents began paying for Azucena to take a mototaxi, what India would call a rickshaw, to work, and began driving her home in the evenings.
The earliest money I remember making myself began after we moved into the white house behind the Catholic seminary.
Mango and avocado seasons never coincided, so the trees in our back yard became a steady source of income in middle school.
Since at least one person in my immediate family is allergic to each one, they brought in as many Córdobas to my wallet as they did fruit wasps to the backyard.
Guacamole was new for me when I moved to the United States, as was eating mango-flavored anything without getting a rash.
My mother prizes her lime tree, though.
The look of forced-pleasure on her face when a guest dumped the entire yield on her porch, underripe, was humorous until we went without her limeade for three weeks.
I use her recipe at college potlucks.
In eleventh grade, I took an Intro to Business elective class that encouraged entrepreneurial thinking at my school.
I and my Nicaraguan and Korean-Guatemalan business partners, Jailene and Juan, chose to undermine the Cafetín and provide a “healthier” alternative to the Nicaraguan lunches and snacks.
For a whole school year, we sold apples and caramel and cold vegetables with salad dressings during recess, but I still ate leftovers out of my Tupperware containers.
That semester, though the student athletes and young elementary school teachers became regular customers, we made twelve dollars total.
Senior year, my parents decided to get me a lunch card, instead of sending leftovers with me, because I was staying at school late each day for extracurriculars.
I was awakened far too late to the soft crunch of fried fish arroz y frijoles molidos alongside cold ensalada Thursdays, tajada Tuesdays and “squeaky cheese,” and warm, waking arroz con leche Monday mornings.
When I go home now, though I am taller than Azucena, the smell of the frijoles rojos that she cooks, the humidity from the steam that screams out of the rotating lid of the pressure cooker: they dwarf me.
Home is where my father makes his own pasta sauce from fresh vegetables and grills pizza with basil picked from outside on Friday nights, but also where milk is served in a bag: two-percent feels like heavy cream.
It is where sand is a common texture (whether it’s in rosquilla cookies or cacao), where Coke is made with cane sugar instead of high fructose corn syrup, where Tropical means “how it feels outside” and also “the company that makes fake orange juice,” and where the fake orange juice is called Tampico, not Sunny-D.
Home is knowing that iguana tastes like chicken when you boil it a while.
A list of what isolation cannot steal
Birds : Grackels, Cardinals, & Ospreys still
cut across parking lot to hardware store & fish market
Dalmation-Dane three doors down : twice daily walks he & three year-old
enjoy, crossing my lawn with mother in tow
Five stories stacked beside me : Danez’s, Justin’s, Alejandro’s, Victor’s, & Kenji’s
Gray squirrels that shared mealtime : six feet apart, of course
Hammock : suspension bridge between dreams, those
inventions of the remembering unconscious
Jump squats : exercise, once relegated to high school memories,
keeping a group of seven friends active & communicating
Laughter — & may I forget the word cliché to
momentarily recall Love’s importance in my
nascent understanding of indefinite distance
Observation : accounting for each sense’s remarks to
perceive — mosquito bite & dog in passing car
— quietly, as even Jesus asked to keep some miracles a secret
Red : its foundational being beneath home, beneath
skin, beneath yellow & orange in the sunset, beneath painted brick
Taking off clothes : to become clean, to sleep, to
uncover what for years has felt grossly hidden
Very crispy dino nuggets, macaroni & cheese, pressed
white bread with turkey & cheese between it : food I
expect to initiate time travel.
YouTube, Snapchat, Facebook, Instagram, FaceTime &
Zoom calls : pathway hope takes to work.
After a Summer Storm in Orlando, FL
After Maxine Kumin
My rescue terrier and clockwork thunder were acquainted
soon after his first birthday. Alone, he and his stripes and spots
shivered in a studio apartment with nowhere to hide
except under the bed or between a couch and the wall.
He is in the latter place now, in another apartment; we may have upgraded
to two rooms, and a larger closet, but it is Florida again, summer again,
and in heat our leashed dog-neighbor bit him on the head.
Stormclouds come up suddenly if you don’t catch the wind change,
even if there were other signs: cauliflower clouds stacking high
in the distance, stormfront’s hard edge glinting off the last of sunset.
Near to both airports, we have accustomed to the slight tonal
differences between a thunderhead and a common jet engine.
Many sharp things fly other than lightning; we lay among them,
picking out biting flies’ hums from indifferent bumblebees. The State bird mocks,
hawks nest in the tree-disguised cell-tower, ravens prefer limb standing, dead.
Ducks, herons and ibises scout for frogs in the retention pond at high tide.
Out here, in Alafaya, city blocks are whole square miles.
A siren rounded our block for 5 minutes, skirting the ecological
“hurricane buffer zone” between the swampy coast and the city—
a holey, fallen fence permits deer foraging at dawn and shameless vagrants
who annex and blaze their narrow trails and dwell in their forest.
The trench out back, grassed and sandy, soft to the step,
feeds two storm drains parallel to the sewer line; waste runs
into both as the storms wash away my neighborhood.
Dip tobacco wrappers, chicken bones, waterlogged diapers, basketballs stolen
by the storm drift into the yard I share with 13 others—what was left behind
migrates onto my stoop, at the bottom of my walk-up stairs.
Afterward, the heat lifts for just a moment. Afterward, we’re in that time before
God separated the waters above from below. Then, He does it again:
the dry land, birds and beasts of the air, and the fat possum who eats the cat food
from Marina’s piece of the porch. I am on my own, but Leonard quivers against me
as the way of fetid things continues to happen, again and again, around me.
After a fight, at Hurricane Creek, Tuscaloosa, AL.
1
Sometimes I follow by ravine
after the sound of rushing water
to find only firm high winds
in trees at the top of a hill.
A stranger told me yesterday
it’s been windy here since January.
The wind carries a bark on it
that I hear twice, but my ear cocks
toward a tu-whit! Tu-whoo…
When I throw a stick in the woods,
it becomes every stick, all the wood,
falling at once, itself, collective.
2
When I say “we” you still
picture yourself separately.
You are like a river, still
-surfaced but strong-currented,
secretly. I would not become
your enemy. I would only walk by you.
All we have are the same words
as each other. Looking down, I realize
there’s another trail above us.
Come, there is only a little to cross
between them. Do it with me. Will you come
to see what here looks like from there?
3
I see even my friends’ hurt guiding them.
There is a clear steep trail down to the water.
I put no faith in the so-called
Goodness of people. Or in my goodness.
Heather/n
How much control am I willing to give up? I keep asking myself this:
There’s like a line break between me and God.
I haven’t been paying attention. My fingernails and toenails grew out again,
My dog is rooting under a bush; there’s a new bird chirping.
My watch smells like all the colognes I’ve sprayed on my wrist since college:
Pepper, rose, bergamot, lime — I’m subscribed to flora in tiny vials.
The wisteria froze and withered, and though it’s already almost summer,
It’s spring now. My hunch is that God’s favorite color is light green.
Was that crazy to say? Light green is THAT color, whether bamboo, kudzu or thorn.
It grows more than three meters in a day,
And light green is giving me that springtime religion—
That’s why God put all his favorite holidays there.
Gardens look real good in spring, when even the small things,
Moss and algae and lichen, and bugs, resurrect out of gray and brown.
I take my dog to three different gardens every week. Gardens are good
For naming things, and for kissing and for sweating, and for discovering,
And for long cries. I bet when Jesus died, he came back light green — cause God
LIVES for a resurrection, and who doesn’t need a little more life in their life?
Molly
There are stories I forget I carry
from life to life, from country to country
like a five-dollar bill in a coat pocket.
Our first dog was a black Labrador
I came home from fourth grade to find:
Dark animal on the white tile of our tiny home —
First animal I felt could love me back —
Named after a chapter book mother —
What meaning I invested in this pet
Before we had to send her away to camp
Where she had 640 times more space,
Rice bowls twice-daily plus what she caught
My dog Molly caught the bus
To heaven while we were at school
And she was buried beneath where she sat
Day after day in the shade of the sun —
A hole dug out of a hole she dug,
A well in the dirt next to the water pump —
She had chased the bus many times before
She had chased our cars the same way,
Put her big puppy jaws around their siding
And clamped, gnawed (She hoped for a ride
On the seat of a bicycle on the back porch
And on the corner of a magic couch
But she never demanded the passenger seat
Or to sit in the Way-Back —
Just a lip to hold onto,
A lip to stand on, the wind in her face.
I try not to stick around the places
that sink. Truly y’all, who destines
to build their own house on sand.
I try not to stir up the roots of
my privilege. I only say what they
want to hear. Knowing the they is a me
I divert my eyes and squirm. I fantasize of
smashing its porcelain figure.
But if I felt I could, I would seat
This family sewn into my
skin. I would tell them of the implicational
liabilities, how my papa’s bible stinks
their house with dead platitudes, their
security blankets, the likeliness of slaveowners in their sinews.
I would persuade of how ought we to air out the cabin,
how I’d slam open closets revealing little brown
skeletons in the thousands, every doll posing
around each corner of history.
I would scream of the falseness that never calms
me in your home, how the justification of it
swept away trust of care—how
we cannot believe whom the fault really
lies with; a house of Christians, or of sin
but I keep my hidden guilt to myself (1). I keep my
lies white and my friends away. I let ignorance be
bliss. I grow part of the pattern. I know the past’s
mine and my responsibility’s unfinished.

I was almost blinded to your hidings and I’ve had these questions ever since.
He was so excited he was shaking.
just a young bluegrass boy
the criticism seems to have …
Simon Peter shocks his wife
YouTube - 3 days ago
Why did Simon’s name changed to Peter?
A Peter believes he has no feelings for anyone when really deep down inside he knows he
dwindle to nothing
Though she has not mentioned anything about Peter’s health in her latest tweet, Vanitha shared how life is tough right now
How did Peter die?
Exact identity unknown
See definitions in : Bridge / Biblical
About 1,660,000,000 results.
Optimize cognitive, physical, and emotional health. Start here…
A nimble balance between comfort, beauty, modernity and continuity with the past
Until the Ascension of Christ.
I think I can I think I can
Yes, I cried.
Yes, I thought about the body
politic. The concessions stand:
If it were to hurt me, you would
quit loving him.
You know you
are nowhere near the first one
to say my timing was off—but
you didn’t say that. It is only a series
in my memory:
their brown door
closed to knocks. A FaceTime call,
hikes in which friendship’s a fence,
a day-long drive home from Miami,
and your car.
I make playlists
each time the feelings are made
clear: confirmed in the negative
as I learn to read silence, to be
honest to myself:
A process // habit:
am I a joke to you? Things aren’t irreparable
That kinda day hurts, doesn’t it? I’m uncertain
about l*ve, haven’t heard from you. soft pain
of loss, hello.
Yes, I’m taking
this quite well. I hadn’t realized
until now, the information delay
burns through grace like water
into cotton candy.
Locust / Grasshopper
I am green — I consume myself and multiply.
See me spotted among the spotted red &
green — or don’t : I know you
are paid to kill me. A quarter, or
a 5 going by the name of conquest-doer
The stories you tell yourself are under
controlled inflation — growing like me,
consuming like me. Your broomstick flipped
upside down, the blunt end you will bunt
me with if you catch me, swat me onto
terracotta or soil. The rain lilies on
sabbatical — i come dry, hard-shelled,
soft & connected on the inside. I do not splat.
Try it— I’ll stick with you. I am plague
by technicality. I sound, I roar. I am
legion, demon, 6 legs, six wings, six spines
you don’t have to think of me but you cannot
extract me. i am inextricable from this
lawn, bush, hedge, grass, flower bed.
You only wish i would smite you back,
but I have other places to be
I scrape the earth with my razor teeth
rain phases me — leaf-cutter is not in
my agenda. No need for storage, i
glut on green — i will until i am finished
or you finish for me. take a leg, as a treat
you can have it; I have work.
you’ll need more than a few pins to splay
me, crucified in shadowbox with morpho,
elephant beetle, whip tailed scorpion.
there is no small feat on this mountain
but i have no fear — no wall or razor wire
or barricade or guard will prevent my
bacchanal — no fumigate will block my
drive my droves — it hasn’t before.
I have been a cloud ever since that first
command from God — I do the work of
weeding, of famine of reminder of
economy. I am temper timeless — hot & cold
until spitroasted or freeze dried
Mad libs for dinnertime
Watch your eyes brighten as you eat.
Taste your mouth [destroying/
translating/
building] flavor to nutrient.
Hear your ears from the inside out, the [swishes/
cracks/
flattenings]
As you [inhale/
pick at] that which is before you, your ___noun___,
Which is the vessel for which we understand: [the food for the company/
the company for the food/
the food for the movie/
the bread for the soup/
the soup for the bread/
the bread for the ritual/
the meal for the diplomacy/
the portions for making it/
your fasting for their survival] ?
And what will your [plate/company/country/life] look like afterwards?
Ode to Televisions
WHAT HORRORS YOU’VE BORNE / WITNESS TO / & WHAT JOYS
THE DELIGHTS OF LOVE /OF ISLANDS OF LOVE / OF LOVE’S DRAMAS
GIVING LOVE AS REALITY / AS DOCUMENTARY / AS TOURISM
LIKE WALKING / ON AIR / SILENCE IN THE GREEN ROOM
I’D LIKE TO SOLVE THE PUZZLE / IT’S A BEFORE & AFTER
ANSWER / DAILY DOUBLING / DOWN TO / SPIN-OFFS IN
TRIPLET[S] / HOMICIDE / THAT WINS AWARDS / DURING ADS
THAT COST MILLIONS / FOR 30 SECONDS / I’D LIKE TO BUY
A VOWEL / PLEASE / I’D LIKE A / U
Ode to Bundled Streaming
YOU AND I HAVE CHANGED / PLACES / NEW ERAS
WE UNDERSTAND EACH OTHER / WE CATER TO ONE
ANOTHER / I BRING YOU WITH ME / I TALK YOU UP
YOU’RE ADAPTABLE / WE FEED EACH OTHER
SPENDING MONEY ON YOU COMES EASY / I DON’T KNOW
WHAT I WANT / BUT YOU HAVE IT / BACKWARDS
UNDERSTANDINGS OF YOUTH / IN & OUT OF FASHION
BUT CLOTHED IN THE SAME TROPES / I FEAR FOR YOUR
CANCELLATION / YET I AWAIT IT / & DREAM OF IT
THE THINGS / WE LEARNED / FROM EACH OTHER
THE CATEGORY WAS “BEFORE / & AFTER” / IT’S OVER
YOU WILL EMAIL ME ONE MORE TIME / STILL ARMED
WITH KNOWING / EVERYTHING ABOUT ME.
On Bible Memory
to be read responsively by the half-verse
1 The beginning is like reading Aristotle or Faulkner;
the cadence of the past is a darkened looking glass.
2 At the start of things, we list our biological premises;
the names of our mothers begin to unwither.
3 I meditate on my whiteboard’s repetition day and night
across from the headboard of my full-size bed.
4 My dog snores under my blanket;
my mind fills in the initials of a distilled epistle.
5 Argument solidifies from testimonial to proclamation;
I remember I am named after no apostle.
6 Rather, my name is of a boy afraid to be a man;
he will fight with his mind but not with his hands.
7 Where can I learn to love with all of me;
Where could I escape this question’s answer?
8 If I say that I am taking this all down,
I lie or
I am deceiving myself.
9 If I claim I am never wrong,
the truth is not in me or
I am not practicing the truth.
10 What necrotic fun that is;
it has been killing me for a long time.
11 As a child, I memorized;
as a child, I could recite
12 where faith comes from, and what it is;
who faith comes from, and the circumstances of his birth.
13 Once I spoke to this child, on the floor with his nebulizer;
he struggled to breathe the spirit of God.
14 I told him perfection was a moot point, now;
his soft answer turned away my wrath.